
Death on the Nile 


By Agatha Christie 

AUTHOR OF “THE MURDER OF ROGER ACKROYD,” 

“POIROT LOSES A CLIENT,” ETC. 

It was very peaceful on the river. The smooth, slippery 
black rocks of the Nile lay half out of the water like vast, 
prehistoric monsters as the luxury river steamer Karnak pushed 
silently upstream. Inside the spacious lounge Tim Allerton and 
iis mother were playing bridge with the Otterbournes. Colonel 
Race had just ordered his third whiskey, Mr. Fanthorp was 
dozing, and Linnet Doyle was very much in love with her 
Drand new husband. Hercule Poirot was worried. He had a 
/ague, uneasy feeling that this boat was taking them all on a 
dangerous journey, a journey heading perhaps for unknown 
zurrents of disaster. “ Tiens he thought, “I am without doubt 
magining,” but Poirot knew, in spite of himself, that his pre- 
nonitions were almost never false. It was not until the stillness 
)f the Egyptian night had lulled even Poirot himself to a sense 
>f security that a sharp report from a revolver, the sound of 
unning feet along the promenade deck and a muffled splash 
iroved his first instinct correct. 

In this absorbing mystery novel the author has departed so 
ar from the usual and created such a fascinating background 
nd such an arresting solution that the effect will startle the 
nost blase reader. This is the one combination that is impos- 
ible to top— Agatha Christie and Hercule Poirot at their best! 






DEATH ON THE 
NILE 



ENGLAND




CHAPTER I 


“Linnet Ridgeway!” 

“That’s her!” said Mr. Burnaby, the landlord of the 
Three Crowns. 

He nudged his companion. 

The two men stared with round bucolic eyes and slightly 
open mouths. 

A big scarlet Rolls Royce had just stopped in front of 
the local post office. 

A girl jumped out, a girl without a hat and wearing a 
frock that looked (but only looked) simple. A girl with 
golden hair and straight autocratic features— a girl with a 
lovely shape— a girl such as was seldom seen in Malton- 
under-Wode. 

With a quick imperative step she passed into the post 
office. 

“That’s her!” said Mr. Burnaby again. And he went on in 
a low awed voice: “Millions she’s got. . . . Going to spend 
thousands on the place. Swimming pools there’s going to 
be, and Italian gardens and a ballroom and half of the house 
pulled down and rebuilt. . . .” 

“She’ll bring money into the town,” said his friend. He 
was a lean seedy-looking man. His tone was envious and 
grudging. 

Mr. Burnaby agreed. 

“Yes, it’s a great thing for Malton-under-Wode. A great 
thing it is.” 

O 


3 


4 


Death on the Nile 


Mr. Burnaby was complacent about it. - j 

“Wake us all up proper,” he added. , 

“Bit of a difference from Sir George,” said the other. | 

“Ah, it was the ’orses did for him,” said Mr. Burnaby i 
indulgently. “Never ’ad no luck.” ( 

“What did he get for the place?” 

“A cool sixty thousand, so I’ve heard.” 

The lean man whistled. 

Mr. Burnaby went on triumphantly: “And they say ! 
she’ll have spent another sixty thousand before she’s fin- 
ished!” 

“Wicked!” said the lean man. “Where’d she get all that 
money from?” 

“America, so I’ve heard. Her mother was the only daugh- 
ter of one of those millionaire blokes. Quite like the Pic- 
tures, isn’t it?” 

The girl came out of the post office and climbed into 
the car. 

As she drove off the lean man followed her with his 
eyes. He muttered: 

“It seems all wrong to me— her looking like that. Money 
and looks— it’s too much! If a girl’s as rich as that she’s 
no right to be a good-looker as well. And she is a good- ! 
looker. . . . Got everything, that girl has. Doesn’t seem 
fair. . . 

ii 

Extract from the Social column of the Daily Blague. 

Among those supping at Chez Ma Tante 1 noticed beau- 
tiful Linnet Ridgeway. She was with the Hon. Joanna 
Southwood, Lord Windlesham and Mr. Toby Bryce. Miss 
Ridgeway, as everyone knows, is the daughter of Melhuish 


Death on the Nile 


5 


Ridgeway who married Anna Hartz. She inherits from her 
grandfather, Leopold Hartz, an immense fortune. The 
lovely Linnet is the sensation of the moment and it is 
rumoured that an engagement may be announced shortly „ 
Certainly Lord W indie sham seemed very epris!! 

in 

The Hon. Joanna Southwood said: 

“Darling, I think it’s going to be all perfectly marvel- 
lousfr 

She was sitting in Linnet Ridgeway’s bedroom at Wode 
Hall. 

From the window the eye passed over the gardens to 
open country with blue shadows of woodlands. 

“It’s rather perfect, isn’t it?” said Linnet. 

She leaned her arms on the window sill. Her face was 
eager, alive, dynamic. Beside her, Joanna Southwood 
seemed, somehow, a little dim— a tall thin young woman 
of twenty -seven, with a long clever face and freakishly 
plucked eyebrows. 

“And you’ve done so much in the time! Did you have 
lots of architects and things?” 

“Three.” 

“What are architects like? I don’t think I’ve ever seen 
any.” 

“They were all right. I found them rather unpractical 
sometimes.” 

“Darling, you soon put that right! You are the most 
practical creature!” 

Joanna picked up a string of pearls from the dressing- 
table. 


6 


Death on the Nile 


“I suppose these are real, aren’t they, Linnet?” 

“Of course.” 

“I know it’s ‘of course’ to you, my sweet, but it 
wouldn’t be to most people. Heavily cultured or even 
Wool worth! Darling, they really are incredible , so ex- 
quisitely matched. They must be worth the most fabu- 
lous sums!” 

“Rather vulgar, you think?” 

“No, not at all— just pure beauty. What are they 
worth?” 

“About fifty thousand.” 

“What a lovely lot of money! Aren’t you afraid of hav- 
ing them stolen?” 

“No, I always wear them— and anyway they’re insured.” 

“Let me wear them till dinner time, will you, darling? 
It would give me such a thrill.” 

Linnet laughed. 

“Of course if you like.” 

“You know, Linnet, I really do envy you. You’ve sim- 
ply got everything. Here you are at twenty, your own 
mistress, with any amount of money, looks, superb health. 
You’ve even got brains! When are you twenty-one?” 

“Next June. I shall have a grand coming-of-age party in 
London.” 

“And then are you going to marry Charles Windlesham? 
All the dreadful little gossip writers are getting so excited 
about it. And he really is frightfully devoted.” 

Linnet shrugged her shoulders. 

“I don’t know. I don’t really want to marry anyone 
yet.” 

“Darling, how right you are! It’s never quite the same 
afterward, is it?” 


Death on the Nile 


7 


The telephone shrilled and Linnet went to it. 

“Yes? Yes?” 

The butler’s voice answered her. 

“Miss de Bellefort is on the line. Shall I put her 
through?” 

“Bellefort? Oh, of course, yes, put her through.” 

A click and a voice, an eager, soft, slightly breathless 
voice: “Hullo, is that Miss Ridgeway? Linnet!” 

“ Jackie darling! I haven’t heard anything of you for 
ages and ages!” 

“I know. It’s awful. Linnet, I want to see you terribly.” 

“Darling, can’t you come down here? My new toy. I’d 
love to show it to you.” 

“That’s just what I want to do.” 

“Well, jump into a train or a car.” 

“Right, I will. A frightfully dilapidated two-seater. I 
bought it for fifteen pounds, and some days it goes beau- 
tifully. But it has moods. If I haven’t arrived by tea time 
you’ll know it’s had a mood. So long, my sweet.” 

Linnet replaced the receiver. She crossed back to Joanna. 

“That’s my oldest friend, Jacqueline de Bellefort. We 
were together at a convent in Paris. She’s had the most 
terribly bad luck. Her father was a French Count, her 
mother was American— a Southerner. The father went off 
with some woman, and her mother lost all her money in 
the Wall Street crash. Jackie was left absolutely broke. I 
don’t know how she’s managed to get along the last two 
years.” 

Joanna was polishing her deep-blood-coloured nails with 
her friend’s nail pad. She leant back with her head on one 
side scrutinizing the effect. 

“Darling,” she drawled, “won’t that be rather tiresome? 


8 


Death on the Nile 


If any misfortunes happen to my friends I always drop 
them at once ! It sounds heartless, but it saves such a lot 
of trouble later! They always want to borrow money off 
you, or else they start a dressmaking business and you 
have to get the most terrible clothes from them. Or they 
paint lampshades, or do Batik scarves.” 

“So if I lost all my money, you’d drop me tomorrow?”; 

“Yes, darling, I would. You can’t say I’m not honest 
about it! I only like successful people. And you’ll find 
that’s true of nearly everybody— only most people won’t 
admit it. They just say that really they can’t put up with 
Mary or Emily or Pamela any more! ‘Her troubles have 
made her so bitter and peculiar, poor dear!’ ” 

“How beastly you are, Joanna!” 

“I’m only on the make, like everyone else.” 

“/’m not on the make!” 

“For obvious reasons! You don’t have to be sordid when 
good-looking, middle-aged American trustees pay you 
over a vast allowance every quarter.” 

“And you’re wrong about Jacqueline,” said Linnet. 
“She’s not a sponge. I’ve wanted to help her, but she won’t 
let me. She’s as proud as the devil.” 

“What’s she in such a hurry to see you for? I’ll bet 
she wants something! You just wait and see.” 

“She sounded excited about something,” admitted Lin- 
net. “Jackie always did get frightfully worked up over 
things. She once stuck a penknife into someone!” 

“Darling, how thrilling!” 

“A boy who was teasing a dog. Jackie tried to get him 
to stop. He wouldn’t. She pulled him and shook him but 
he was much stronger than she was, and at last she 
whipped out a penknife and plunged it right into him. 


Death on the Nile 


9 


f There was the most awful row!” 

. “I should think so. It sounds most uncomfortable!” 

Linnet’s maid entered the room. With a murmured word 
of apology, she took down a dress from the wardrobe 
and went out of the room with it. 

“What’s the matter with Marie?” asked Joanna. “She’s 
been crying.” 

“Poor thing. You know I told you she wanted to marry 
a man who has a job in Egypt. She didn’t know much 
about him, so I thought I’d better make sure he was all 
right. It turned out that he had a wife already— and three 
children.” 

“What a lot of enemies you must make, Linnet.” 

“Enemies?” Linnet looked surprised. 

Joanna nodded and helped herself to a cigarette. 

“Enemies, my sweet. You’re so devastatingly efficient. 

, And you’re so frightfully good at doing the right thing.” 
j Linnet laughed. 

“Why, I haven’t got an enemy in the world!” 

! IV 

t Lord Windlesham sat under the cedar tree. His eyes 
•ested on the graceful proportions of Wode Hall. There 
vas nothing to mar its old-world beauty; the new build- 
, r ngs and additions were out of sight round the corner. It 
vas a fair and peaceful sight bathed in the Autumn sun- . 
hine. Nevertheless, as he gazed, it was no longer Wode 
, Tall that Charles Windlesham saw. Instead, he seemed to 
, ee a more imposing Elizabethan mansion, a long sweep of 
f >ark, a more bleak background. ... It was his own fam- 
^ y seat, Charltonbury, and in the foreground stood a fig- 


io Death on the Nile 

ure— a girl’s figure, with bright golden hair and an eager 
confident face . . . Linnet as mistress of Charltonbury! 

He felt very hopeful. That refusal of hers had not been 
at all a definite refusal. It had been little more than a plea 
for time. Well, he could afford to wait a little. . . . 

How amazingly suitable the whole thing was. It was 
certainly advisable that he should marry money, but not 
such a matter of necessity that he could regard himself as 
forced to put his own feelings on one side. And he loved 
Linnet. He would have wanted to marry her even if she 
had been practically penniless, instead of one of the richest 
girls in England. Only, fortunately, she was one of the 
richest girls in England. . . . 

His mind played with attractive plans for the future. 
The Mastership of the Roxdale perhaps, the restoration of 
the west wing, no need to let the Scotch shooting. . . . 

Charles Windlesham dreamed in the sun. 


It was four o’clock when the dilapidated little two 
seater stopped with a sound of crunching gravel. A girl 
got out of it— a small slender creature with a mop of dar 
hair. She ran up the steps and tugged at the bell. 

A few minutes later she was being ushered into the long 
stately drawing-room, and an ecclesiastical butler was say 
ing with the proper mournful intonation, “Miss de Belle 
fort.” 

“Linnet!” 

“Jackie!” 

Windlesham stood a little aside, watching sympatheti- 
cally as this fiery little creature flung herself open-armec 


Death on the Nile 


1 1 


upon Linnet. 

“Lord Windlesham— Miss de Bellefort— my best friend.” 
A pretty child, he thought— not really pretty but de- 
cidedly attractive, with her dark curly hair and her enor- 
mous eyes. He murmured a few tactful nothings and then 
nanaged unobtrusively to leave the two friends together. 

Jacqueline pounced— in a fashion that Linnet remem- 
jered as being characteristic of her. 

“Windlesham? Windlesham? That’s the man the papers 
ilways say you’re going to marry! Are you, Linnet? Are 
mu?” 

Linnet murmured, “Perhaps.” 

“Darling— I’m so glad! He looks nice.” 

“Oh, don’t make up your mind about it— I haven’t made 
p my own mind yet.” 

“Of course not! Queens always proceed with due de- 
beration to the choosing of a consort!” 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Jackie.” 

“But you are a queen, Linnet! You always were. Sa 
lajeste, la reine Linette. Linette la blonde! And I— I'm the 
hieen’s confidante! The trusted Maid of Honour.” 

“What nonsense you talk, Jackie darling! Where have 
ou been all this time? You just disappear. And you never 
rite.” 

“I hate writing letters. Where have I been? Oh, about 
iree parts submerged, darling. In jobs, you know. Grim 
bs with grim women!” 

“Darling, I wish you’d—” 

“Take the Queen’s bounty? Well, frankly, darling, that’s 
hat I’m here for. No, not to borrow money. It’s not got 
that yet! But I’ve come to ask a great big important 
vour!” 


12 


Death on the Nile 


“Go on.” 

“If you’re going to marry the Windlesham man, you’ll 
understand, perhaps.” 

Linnet looked puzzled for a minute; then her face 
cleared. 

“Jackie, do you mean—” 

“Yes, darling, Vm engaged!” 

“So that’s it! I thought you were looking particularly 
alive somehow. You always do, of course, but even more 
than usual.” 

“That’s just what I feel like.” 

“Tell me all about him.” 

“His name’s Simon Doyle. He’s big and square and in- 
credibly simple and boyish and utterly adorable! He’s poor 
—got no money. He’s what you call ‘county’ all right 
but very impoverished county— a younger son and all 
that. His people come from Devonshire. He loves country 
and country things. And for the last five years he’s been 
in the city in a stuffy office. And now they’re cutting 
down and he’s out of a job. Linnet, I shall die if I can’t 
marry him! I shall die! I shall die! I shall die. . . .” 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Jackie.” 

“I shall die, I tell you! I’m crazy about him. He’s crazy 
about me. We can’t live without each other.” 

“Darling, you have got it badly!” 

“I know. It’s awful, isn’t it? This love business get^ 
hold of you and you can’t do anything about it.” 

She paused for a minute. Her dark eyes dilated, looked j 
suddenly tragic. She gave a little shiver. 

“It’s— even frightening sometimes! Simon and I were 
made for each other. I shall never care for anyone else 
And you'vt got to help us, Linnet. I heard you’d bough 


: i 


Death on the Nile 


i3 


this place and it put an idea into my head. Listen, you’ll 
have to have a land agent— perhaps two. I want you to give 
the job to Simon.” 

“Oh!” Linnet was startled. 

Jacqueline rushed on: “He’s got all that sort of thing 
at his fingertips. He knows all about estates— was brought 
up on one. And he’s got his business training too. Oh, Lin- 
net, you will give him a job, won’t you, for love of me? 
[f he doesn’t make good, sack him. But he will. And we 
ean live in a little house, and I shall see lots of you, and 
everything in the garden will be too, too divine.” 

She got up. 

“Say you will, Linnet. Say you will. Beautiful Linnet! 
Tall golden Linnet! My own very special Linnet! Say 
/ou will!” 

“Jackie-” 

“You will?” 

Linnet burst out laughing. 

“Ridiculous Jackie! Bring along your young man and 
et me have a look at him and we’ll talk it over.” 

Jackie darted at her, kissing her exuberantly: 

“ Darling Linnet— you’re a real friend! I knew you were, 
fou wouldn’t let me down— ever. You’re just the loveliest 
hing in the world. Good-bye.” 

1 “But, Jackie, you’re staying .” 

“Me? No, I’m not. I’m going back to London, and to- 
lorrow I’ll come back and bring Simon and we’ll settle 
: all up. You’ll adore him. He really is a per.” 

“But can’t you wait and just have tea?” 

“No, I can’t wait, Linnet. I’m too excited. I must get 
ack and tell Simon. I know I’m mad, darling, but I can’t 
^elp it. Marriage will cure me, I expect. It always seems 


14 


Death on the Nile 


to have a very sobering effect on people.” 

She turned at the door, stood a moment, then rushed 
back for a last quick birdlike embrace. 

“Dear Linnet— there’s no one like you.” 

VI 

M. Gaston Blondin, the proprietor of that modish little 
restaurant Chez Ma Tante, was not a man who delighted 
to honour many of his clientele. The rich, the beautiful, 
the notorious and the well-born might wait in vain to be 
signalled out and paid special attention. Only in the rarest 
cases did M. Blondin, with gracious condescension, greet 
a guest, accompany him to a privileged table, and exchange 
with him suitable and apposite remarks. 

On this particular night, M. Blondin had exercised his 
royal perogative three times— once for a Duchess, once 
for a famous racing peer, and once for a little man of 
comical appearance with immense black moustaches, who. 
a casual onlooker would have thought, could bestow nc 
favour on Chez Ma Tante by his presence there. 

M. Blondin, however, was positively fulsome in his at- 
tentions. Though clients had been told for the last hall 
hour that a table was not to be had, one now mysteriousl) 
appeared, placed in a most favourable position. M. Blondir 
conducted the client to it with every appearance of em- 
pressement. r 

“But naturally, for you there is always a table, Monsieui , 
Poirot! How I wish that you would honour us oftener.’ 

Hercule Poirot smiled, remembering that past incideni 
wherein a dead body, a waiter, M. Blondin, and a verj 
lovely lady had played a part. 


Death on the Nile 


i5 


“You are too amiable, Monsieur Blondin,” he said. 

“And you are alone, Monsieur Poirot?” 

“Yes, I am alone.” 

“Oh, well, Jules here will compose for you a little meal 
that will be a poem— positively a poem! Women, however 
charming, have this disadvantage: they distract the mind 
from food! You will enjoy your dinner, Monsieur Poirot; 
I promise you that. Now, as to wine—” 

1 A technical conversation ensued. Jules, the maitre 
cThotel, assisting. 

Before departing, M. Blondin lingered a moment, lower- 
ing his voice confidentially. 

1 “You have grave affairs on hand?” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“I am, alas, a man of leisure,” he said sadly. “I have made 
the economies in my time and I have now the means to 
;njoy a life of idleness.” 

“I envy you.” 

“No, no, you would be unwise to do so. I can assure 
pou, it is not so gay as it sounds.” He sighed. “How true 
s the saying that man was forced to invent work in order 
:o escape the strain of having to think.” 

M. Blondin threw up his hands. 

“But there is so much! There is travel!” 

“Yes, there is travel. Already I have done not so badly. 
This winter I shall visit Egypt, I think. The climate, they 
;ay, is superb! One will escape from the fogs, the grey- 
less, the monotony of the constantly falling rain.” 

“Ah! Egypt,” breathed M. Blondin. 

“One can even voyage there now, I believe, by train, 
escaping all sea travel except the Channel.” 

“Ah, the sea, it does not agree with you?” 


Death on the Nile 



Hercule Poirot shook his head and shuddered slightly. 

“I, too,” said M. Blondin with sympathy. “Curious the 
effect it has upon the stomach.” 

“But only upon certain stomachs! There are people on 
whom the motion makes no impression whatever. They 
actually enjoy it!” 

“An unfairness of the good God,” said M. Blondin. 

He shook his head sadly, and, brooding on the impious 
thought, withdrew. 

Smooth-footed, deft-handed waiters ministered to the 
table. Toast Melba, butter, an ice pail, all the adjuncts to 
a meal of quality. 

The Negro orchestra broke into an ecstasy of strange 
discordant noises. London danced. 

Hercule Poirot looked on, registering impressions in his 
neat orderly mind. 

How bored and weary most of the faces were! Some of 
those stout men, however, were enjoying themselves . . . 
whereas a patient endurance seemed to be the sentiment 
exhibited on their partners’ faces. The fat woman in 
purple was looking radiant. . . . Undoubtedly the fat had 
certain compensations in life ... a zest— a gusto— denied 
to those of more fashionable contours. 

A good sprinkling of young people— some vacant look- 
ing— some bored— some definitely unhappy. How absurd to 
call youth the time of happiness— youth, the time of great- 
est vulnerability! 

His glance softened as it rested on one particular couple. 
A well-matched pair— tall broad-shouldered man, slender 
delicate girl. Two bodies that moved in a perfect rhythm 
of happiness. Happiness in the place, the hour, and in each 
other. 


Death on the Nile 


i7 


The dance stopped abruptly. Hands clapped and it 
started again. After a second encore the couple returned 
to their table close by Poirot. The girl was flushed, laugh- 
ing. As she sat, he could study her face, lifted laughing to 
her companion. 

There was something else beside laughter in her eyes. 
Hercule Poirot shook his head doubtfully. 

“She cares too much, that little one,” he said to himself. 
“It is not safe. No, it is not safe.” 

And then a word caught his ear, “Egypt.” 

Their voices came to him clearly— the girl’s young, fresh, 
arrogant, with just a trace of soft-sounding foreign R’s, 
and the man’s pleasant, low-toned, well-bred English. 

“I’m not counting my chickens before they’re hatched, 
Simon. I tell you Linnet won’t let us down!” 

“/ might let her down.” 

“Nonsense— it’s just the right job for you.” 

“As a matter of fact I think it is. ... I haven’t really 
any doubts as to my capability. And I mean to make good 
—for your sake!” 

The girl laughed softly, a laugh of pure happiness. 

“We’ll wait three months— to make sure you don’t get 
the sack— and then—” 

“And then I’ll endow thee with my worldly goods— 
that’s the hang of it, isn’t it?” 

“And, as I say, we’ll go to Egypt for our honeymoon. 
Damn the expense! I’ve always wanted to go to Egypt all 
my life. The Nile and the pyramids and the sand . . .” 

He said, his voice slightly indistinct: “We’ll see it to- 
gether, Jackie . . . together. Won’t it be marvellous?” 

“I wonder. Will it be as marvellous to you as it is to me? 
Do you really care— as much as I do? ” 




1 8 Death on the Nile 

Her voice was suddenly sharp— her eyes dilated— almost 
with fear. 

The man’s answer came quickly crisp, “Don’t be absurd, 
Jackie.” 

But the girl repeated, “I wonder. . . .” 

Then she shrugged her shoulders. 

“Let’s dance.” 

Hercule Poirot murmured to himself: 

u Un qui aime et un qui se laisse aimer. Yes, I wonder 
too.” 

VII 

Joanna Southwood said, “And suppose he’s a terrible 
tough?” 

Linnet shook her head. “Oh, he won’t be. I can trust 
Jacqueline’s taste.” 

Joanna murmured, “Ah, but people don’t run true to 
form in love affairs.” 

Linnet shook her head impatiently. Then she changed 
the subject. 

“I must go and see Mr. Pierce about those plans.” 

“Plans?” 

“Yes, some dreadful insanitary old cottages. I’m having 
them pulled down and the people moved.” 

“How sanitary and public-spirited of you, darling!” 

“They’d have had to go anyway. Those cottages would 
have overlooked my new swimming pool.” 

“Do the people who lived in them like going?” 

“Most of them are delighted. One or two are being 
rather stupid about it— really tiresome in fact. They don’t 
seem to realize how vastly improved their living condi- 
tions will be!” 


Death on the Nile 19 

“But you’re being quite high-handed about it, I pre- 
sume.” 

“My dear Joanna, it’s to their advantage really.” 

“Yes, dear, I’m sure it is. Compulsory benefit.” 

Linnet frowned. Joanna laughed. 

“Come now, you are a tyrant, admit it. A beneficent 
tyrant if you like!” 

“I’m not the least bit a tyrant.” 

“But you like your own way!” 

“Not especially.” 

“Linnet Ridgeway, can you look me in the face and 
tell me of any one occasion on which you’ve failed to do 
exactly as you wanted?” 

“Heaps of times.” 

“Oh, yes, ‘heaps of times’— just like that— but no con- 
crete example. And you simply can’t think up one, darling, 
however hard you try! The triumphal progress of Linnet 
Ridgeway in her golden car.” 

Linnet said sharply, “You think I’m selfish?” 

“No— just irresistible. The combined effect of money and 
charm. Everything goes down before you. What you can’t 
buy with cash you buy with a smile. Result: Linnet Ridge- 
way, the Girl Who Has Everything.” 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Joanna!” 

“Well, haven’t you got everything?” 

“I suppose I have. ... It sounds rather disgusting, 
somehow!” 

“Of course it’s disgusting, darling! You’ll probably get 
terribly bored and blase by and by. In the meantime, enjoy 
the triumphal progress in the golden car. Only I wonder, I 
really do wonder, what will happen when you want to go 
down a street which has a board up saying ‘No Thorough- 


20 


Death on the Nile 


fare.’ ” 

“Don’t be idiotic, Joanna.” As Lord Windlesham joined 
them, Linnet said, turning to him, “Joanna is saying the 
nastiest things to me.” 

“All spite, darling, all spite,” said Joanna vaguely as she 
got up from her seat. 

She made no apology for leaving them. She had caught 
the glint in Windlesham’s eye. 

He was silent for a minute or two. Then he went 
straight to the point. 

“Have you come to a decision, Linnet?” 

Linnet said slowly: “Am I being a brute? I suppose, if 
I’m not sure, I ought to say ‘No’—” 

He interrupted her. 

“Don’t say it. You shall have time— as much time as you 
want. But I think, you know, we should be happy to- 
gether.” 

“You see,” Linnet’s tone was apologetic, almost childish, 
“I’m enjoying myself so much— especially with all this.” 
She waved a hand. “I wanted to make Wode Hall into my 
real ideal of a country house, and I do think I’ve got it 
nice, don’t you?” 

“It’s beautiful. Beautifully planned. Everything perfect. 
You’re very clever, Linnet.” 

He paused a minute and went on: “And you like Charl- 
tonbury, don’t you? Of course it wants modernizing and 
all that— but you’re so clever at that sort of thing. You’d 
enjoy it.” 

“Why, of course, Charltonbury’s divine.” 

She spoke with ready enthusiasm, but inwardly she was 
conscious of a sudden chill. An alien note had sounded, dis- 
turbing her complete satisfaction with life. She did not 


Death on the Nile 


21 


analyse the feeling at the moment, but later, when Windle- 
sham had gone into the house, she tried to probe into the 
recesses of her mind. 

Charltonbury— yes, that was it— she had resented the 
mention of Charltonbury. But why? Charltonbury was 
modestly famous. Windlesham’s ancestors had held it since 
the time of Elizabeth. To be mistress of Charltonbury 
was a position unsurpassed in society. Windlesham was one 
of the most desirable partis in England 

Naturally he couldn’t take Wode seriously. ... It was 
not in any way to be compared with Charltonbury. 

Ah, but Wode was hers! She had seen it, acquired it, 
rebuilt and re-dressed it, lavished money on it. It was her 
own possession— her kingdom. 

But in a sense it wouldn’t count if she married Windle- 
sham. What would they want with two country places? 
And of the two, naturally Wode Hall would be the one 
to be given up. 

She, Linnet Ridgeway, wouldn’t exist any longer. She 
would be Countess of Windlesham, bringing a fine dowry 
to Charltonbury and its master. She would be queen con- 
sort, not queen any longer. 

“I’m being ridiculous,” said Linnet to herself. 

But it was curious how she did hate the idea of abandon- 
ing Wode. . . . 

And wasn’t there something else nagging at her? 

Jackie’s voice with that queer blurred note in it say- 
ing: “I shall die if I can’t marry him! I shall die. I shall 
die . . ” 

So positive, so earnest. Did she. Linnet, feel like that 
lbout Windlesham? Assuredly she didn’t. Perhaps she 
:ould never feel like that about anyone. It must be— rather 


22 


Death on the Nile 


wonderful— to feel like that. ... d 

The sound of a car came through the open window. t 

Linnet shook herself impatiently. That must be Jackie t 
and her young man. She’d go out and meet them. 

She was standing in the open doorway as Jacqueline and 1 
Simon Doyle got out of the car. 

“Linnet!” Jackie ran to her. “This is Simon. Simon, 
here’s Linnet. She’s just the most wonderful person in the 
world.” 

Linnet saw a tall, broad-shouldered young man, with [ 
very dark blue eyes, crisply curling brown hair, a square s 
chin and a boyish, appealingly simple smile. ... 1 

She stretched out a hand. The hand that clasped hers 
was firm and warm. . . . She liked the way he looked at i 
her, the naive genuine admiration. 

Jackie had told him she was wonderful, and he clearly | 
thought that she was wonderful. ... i 

A warm sweet feeling of intoxication ran through her 
veins. 

“Isn’t this all lovely?” she said. “Come in, Simon, and 
let me welcome my new land agent properly.” 

And as she turned to lead the way she thought: “I’m 
frightfully— frightfully happy. I like Jackie’s young man 
... I like him enormously. . . .” 

And then with a sudden pang, “Lucky Jackie. . . .” 

VIII 

Tim Allerton leant back in his wicker chair and yawned 
as he looked out over the sea. He shot a quick sidelong 
glance at his mother. 

Mrs. Allerton was a good-looking, white-haired woman 


Death on the Nile 


23 


of fifty. By imparting an expression of pinched severity 
to her mouth every time she looked at her son, she sought 
f to disguise the fact of her intense affection for him. Even 
total strangers were seldom deceived by this device and 
i Tim himself saw through it perfectly. 

He said, “Do you really like Majorca, Mother?” 

1 “Well,” Mrs. Allerton considered, “it’s cheap.” 

! “And cold,” said Tim with a slight shiver. 

He was a tall, thin young man, with dark hair and a 
1 rather narrow chest. His mouth had a very sweet expres- 
; sion; his eyes were sad and his chin was indecisive. He had 
long delicate hands. 

; Threatened by consumption some years ago, he had 
never displayed a really robust physique. He was popu- 
larly supposed “to write,” but it was understood among 
his friends that inquiries as to literary output were not 
encouraged. 

“What are you thinking of, Tim?” 

Mrs. Allerton was alert. Her bright, dark-brown eyes 
looked suspicious. 

Tim Allerton grinned at her. 

“I was thinking of Egypt.” 

“Egypt?” 

Mrs. Allerton sounded doubtful. 

“Real warmth, darling. Lazy golden sands. The Nile. 
I’d like to go up the Nile, wouldn’t you?” 

“Oh, I’d like it.” Her tone was dry. “But Egypt’s ex- 
pensive, my dear. Not for those who have to count the 
I pennies.” 

Tim laughed. He rose, stretched himself. Suddenly he 
looked alive and eager. There was an excited note in his 
vmice. 


2 4 


Death on the Nile 


“The expense will be my affair. Yes, darling. A little 
flutter on the Stock Exchange. With thoroughly satisfac- 
tory results. I heard this morning.” 

“This morning?” said Mrs. Allerton sharply. “You only 
had one letter and that—” 

She stopped and bit her lip. 

Tim looked momentarily undecided whether to be 
amused or annoyed. Amusement gained the day. 

“And that was from Joanna,” he finished coolly. “Quite 
right, Mother. What a Queen of detectives you’d make! 
The famous Hercule Poirot would have to look to his 
laurels if you were about.” 

Mrs. Allerton looked rather cross. 

“I just happened to see the handwriting—” 

“And knew it wasn’t that of a stockbroker? Quite right. 
As a matter of fact it was yesterday I heard from them. 
Poor Joanna’s handwriting is rather noticeable— sprawls 
about all over the envelope like an inebriated spider.” 
“What does Joanna say? Any news?” i 

Mrs. Allerton strove to make her voice sound casual 
and ordinary. The friendship between her son and his 
second cousin, Joanna Southwood, always irritated her. 
Not, as she put it to herself, that there was “anything in 
it.” She was quite sure there wasn’t. Tim had never mani- 
fested a sentimental interest in Joanna, nor she in him. 
Their mutual attraction seemed to be founded on gossip 
and the possession of a large number of friends and ac- 
quaintances in common. They both liked people and dis- 
cussing people. Joanna had an amusing if caustic tongue. 

It was not because Mrs. Allerton feared that Tim might 
fall in love with Joanna that she found herself always be- 
coming a little stiff in manner if Joanna were present or 


Death on the Nile 


25 


vhen letters from her arrived. 

It was some other feeling hard to define— perhaps an un- 
tcknowledged jealousy in the unfeigned pleasure Tim 
y ilways seemed to take in Joanna’s society. He and his 
nother were such perfect companions that the sight of 
lim absorbed and interested in another woman always 
t itartled Mrs. Allerton slightly. She fancied, too, that her 
)wn presence on these occasions set some barrier between 
t he two members of the younger generation. Often she 
tad come upon them eagerly absorbed in some conversa- 
s :ion and, at sight of her, their talk had wavered, had 
;eemed to include her rather too purposefully and as in 
luty bound. Quite definitely, Mrs. Allerton did not like 
foanna Southwood. She thought her insincere, affected 
md essentially superficial. She found it very hard to pre- 
sent herself saying so in unmeasured tones. 

In answer to her question, Tim pulled the letter out 
of his pocket and glanced through it. It was quite a long 
etter, his mother noted. 

“Nothing much,” he said. “The Devenishes are getting 
1 divorce. Old Monty’s been had up for being drunk in 
:harge of a car. Windlesham’s gone to Canada. Seems he 
was pretty badly hit when Linnet Ridgeway turned him 
down. She’s definitely going to marry this land agent 
person.” 

“How extraordinary! Is he very dreadful?” 

“No, no, not at all. He’s one of the Devonshire Doyles. 
No money, of course— and he was actually engaged to one 
of Linnet’s best friends. Pretty thick, that.” 

“I don’t think it’s at all nice,” said Mrs. Allerton, flush- 
ing. 

Tim flashed her a quick affectionate glance. 


2 6 


Death on the Nile 


: 

T 

r 'J 


“I know, darling. You don’t approve of snaffling other 
people’s husbands and all that sort of thing.” 

“In my day we had our standards,” said Mrs. Allerton 
“And a very good thing too! Nowadays young people! 
seem to think they can just go about doing anything 
they choose.” 

Tim smiled. 

“They don’t only think it. They do it. Vide Linnet 
Ridgeway!” 

“Well, I think it’s horrid!” 

Tim twinkled at her. 

“Cheer up, you old die-hard! Perhaps I agree with you 
Anyway, / haven’t helped myself to anyone’s wife o 
fiancee yet.” 

“I’m sure you’d never do such a thing,” said Mrs. Aller- 
ton. She added with spirit, “I’ve brought you up properly.” 

“So the credit is yours, not mine.” 

He smiled teasingly at her as he folded the letter and 
put it away again. Mrs. Allerton let the thought just flash 
across her mind: “Most letters he shows to me. He only 
reads me snippets from Joanna’s.” 

But she put the unworthy thought away from her, and 
decided, as ever, to behave like a gentlewoman. 

“Is Joanna enjoying life?” she asked. 

“So so. Says she thinks of opening a delicatessen shop 
in Mayfair.” 

“She always talks about being hard up,” said Mrs. Al- 
lerton with a tinge of spite, “but she goes about every- 
where and her clothes must cost her a lot. She’s always 
beautifully dressed.” 

“Ah, well,” said Tim, “she probably doesn’t pay for 
them. No, Mother, I don’t mean what your Edwardian 


Death on the Nile 


nind suggests to you. I just mean quite literally that su 
eaves her bills unpaid.” 

Mrs. Allerton sighed. 

: “I never know how people manage to do that.” 

I “It’s a kind of special gift,” said Tim. “If only you 
tave sufficiently extravagant tastes, and absolutely no 
;ense of money values, people will give you any amount 
t)f credit.” 

“Yes, but you come to the Bankruptcy Court in the 
:nd like poor Sir George Wode.” 

“You have a soft spot for that old horse coper— prob- 
bly because he called you a rosebud in eighteen seventy- 
nine at a dance.” 

“I wasn’t born in eighteen seventy-nine,” Mrs. Ailer- 
on retorted with spirit. “Sir George has charming man- 
lers, and I won’t have you calling him a horse coper.” 

“I’ve heard funny stories about him from people that 
j now.” 

i “You and Joanna don’t mind what you say about peo- 
le; anything will do so long as it’s sufficiently ill-natured.” 
Tim raised his eyebrows. 

1 “My dear, you’re quite heated. I didn’t know old Wode 
;as such a favourite of yours.” 

“You don’t realize how hard it is for him, having to 
) ;11 Wode Hall. He cared terribly about that place.” 

Tim suppressed the easy retort. After all, who was he 
) judge? Instead he said thoughtfully: 

■ “You know, I think you’re not far wrong there. Linnet 
s iked him to come down and see what she’d done to the 
lace, and he refused quite rudely.” 
t “Of course. She ought to have known better than to 
i ;k him.” 


Death on the Nile 


'And I believe he’s quite venomous about her— mut- 
ters things under his breath whenever he sees her. Can’; 
forgive her for having given him an absolutely top pric( 
for the worm-eaten family estate.” 

“And you can’t understand that?” Mrs. Allerton spok< 
sharply. 

“Frankly,” said Tim calmly, “I can’t. Why live in th« 
past? Why cling on to things that have been?” 

“What are you going to put in their place?” 

He shrugged his shoulders. “Excitement, perhaps 
Novelty. The joy of never knowing what may turn uf 
from day to day. Instead of inheriting a useless tract oi 
land, the pleasure of making money for yourself— by yom 
own brains and skill.” 

“A successful deal on the Stock Exchange in fact!” 

He laughed. “Why not?” 

“And what about an equal loss on the Stock Exchange?’ 

“That, dear, is rather tactless. And quite inappropriat( 
today. . . . What about this Egypt plan? ” 

“Well-” 

He cut in, smiling at her: “That’s settled. We’ve botl 
always wanted to see Egypt.” 

“When do you suggest?” 

“Oh, next month. January’s about the best time there 
We’ll enjoy the delightful society in this hotel a few 
weeks longer.” 

“Tim,” said Mrs. Allerton reproachfully. Then she 
added guiltily: “I’m afraid I promised Mrs. Leech thai 
you’d go with her to the police station. She doesn’t un- 
derstand any Spanish.” 

Tim made a grimace. 

“About her ring? The blood-red ruby of the hors( 


Death on the Nile 


29 


leech’s daughter? Does she still persist in thinking it’s 
been stolen? I’ll go if you like, but it’s a waste of time. 
She’ll only get some wretched chambermaid into trouble. 
[ distinctly saw it on her finger when she went into the 
>ea that day. It came off in the water and she never no- 
:Iced.” 

“She says she is quite sure she took it off and left it 
m her dressing-table.” 

“Well, she didn’t. I saw it with my own eyes. The 
voman’s a fool. Any woman’s a fool who goes prancing 
nto the sea in December, pretending the water’s quite 
varm just because the sun happens to be shining rather 
irightly at the moment. Stout women oughtn’t to be 
illowed to bathe anyway; they look so revolting in bath- 
ng dresses.” 

Mrs. Allerton murmured, “I really feel I ought to give 
ip bathing.” 

Tim gave a shout of laughter. 

“You? You can give most of the young things points 
nd to spare.” 

1 Mrs. Allerton sighed and said, “I wish there were a few 
iiore young people for you here.” 

Tim Allerton shook his head decidedly. 

“I don’t. You and I get along rather comfortably with- 
>ut outside distractions.” 

“You’d like it if Joanna were here.” 

“I wouldn’t.” His tone was unexpectedly resolute. 
You’re all wrong there. Joanna amuses me, but I don’t 
sally like her, and to have her around much gets on my 
erves. I’m thankful she isn’t here. I should be quite re- 
gned if I were never to see Joanna again.” 

He added, almost below his breath, “There’s only one 


3« 


Death on the Nile 


woman in the world I’ve got a real respect and admira- 
tion for, and I think, Mrs. Allerton, you know very wel 
who that woman is.” 

His mother blushed and looked quite confused. 

Tim said gravely: “There aren’t very many really nic< 
women in the world. You happen to be one of them.” 

IX 

In an apartment overlooking Central Park in New York 
Mrs. Robson exclaimed: “If that isn’t just too lovely! Yoi 
really are the luckiest girl, Cornelia.” 

Cornelia Robson flushed responsively. She was a big 
clumsy-looking girl with brown doglike eyes. 

“Oh, it will be wonderful!” she gasped. 

Old Miss Van Schuyler inclined her head in a satisfied 
fashion at this correct attitude on the part of poor rela- 
tions. 

“I’ve always dreamed of a trip to Europe,” sighed Cor- 
nelia, “but I just didn’t feel I’d ever get there.” 

“Miss Bowers will come with me as usual, of course,’ 
said Miss Van Schuyler, “but as a social companion I fine 
her limited— very limited. There are many little things thal 
Cornelia can do for me.” 

“I’d just love to, Cousin Marie,” said Cornelia eagerly. 

“Well, well, then that’s settled,” said Miss Van Schuy- 
ler. “Just run and find Miss Bowers, my dear. It’s time 
for my eggnog.” 

Cornelia departed. Her mother said: “My dear Marie. 
I’m really most grateful to you! You know I think Cor- 
nelia suffers a lot from not being a social success. It makes 
her feel kind of mortified. If I could afford to take hei 


Death on the Nile 


3i 


j. to places— but you know how it’s been since Ned died.” 
I “I’m very glad to take her,” said Miss Van Schuyler. 
“Cornelia has always been a nice handy girl, willing to 
run errands, and not so selfish as some of these young 
:e people nowadays.” 

Mrs. Robson rose and kissed her rich relative’s wrinkled 
and slightly yellow face. 

“I’m just ever so grateful,” she declared. 

On the stairs she met a tall capable looking woman who 
i was carrying a glass containing a yellow foamy liquid. 

,!]} “Well, Miss Bowers, so you’re off to Europe?” 

“Why, yes, Mrs. Robson.” 
a “What a lovely trip!” 

“Why, yes, I should think it would be very enjoyable.” 
“But you’ve been abroad before?” 
j “Oh, yes, Mrs. Robson. I went over to Paris with Miss 
1. Van Schuyler last Fall. But I’ve never been to Egypt 
before.” 

.. Mrs. Robson hesitated. 

“I do hope— there won’t be any— trouble.” 

111 She had lowered her voice. Miss Bowers, however, re- 
j | plied in her usual tone: 

it “Oh, no, Mrs. Robson; I shall take good care of that. 
I keep a very sharp look-out always.” 

But there was still a faint shadow on Mrs. Robson’s 
, face as she slowly continued down the stairs. 

ie| 

x 

e,i 

, In his office down town Mr. Andrew Pennington was 
, s opening his personal mail. Suddenly his fist clenched itself 
■t and came down on his desk with a bang; his face crim- 


1 


32 


Death on the Nile 


soned and two big veins stood out on his forehead. He s 
pressed a buzzer on his desk and a smart looking stenog- 
rapher appeared with commendable promptitude. ( 

“Tell Mr. Rockford to step in here.” 

“Yes, Mr. Pennington.” 

A few minutes later, Sterndale Rockford, Pennington’s i 
partner, entered the office. The two men were not un- 
like— both tall, spare, with greying hair and clean-shaven, t 
clever faces. 

“What’s up, Pennington?” 

Pennington looked up from the letter he was re-reading. 
He said, “Linnet’s married. . . 

“What?” 

“You heard what I said! Linnet Ridgeway’s married!” 

“How? When? Why didn’t we hear about it?” 

Pennington glanced at the calendar on his desk. 

“She wasn’t married when she wrote this letter, but 
she’s married now. Morning of the fourth. That’s today.” 

Rockford dropped into a chair. 

“Whew! No warning? Nothing? Who’s the man?” 

Pennington referred again to the letter. 

“Doyle. Simon Doyle.” 

“What sort of a fellow is he? Ever heard of him?” 

“No. She doesn’t say much. . . .” He scanned the 
lines of clear, upright handwriting. “Got an idea there’s 
something hole-and-corner about the business. . . . That 
doesn’t matter. The whole point is, she’s married.” 

The eyes of the two men met. Rockford nodded. 

“This needs a bit of thinking out,” he said quietly. 

“What are we going to do about it?” 

“I’m asking you.” 

The two men sat silent. Then Rockford asked, “Got 


Death on the Nile 


33 


any plan?” 

Pennington said slowly: “The Normandie sails today. 
One of us could just make it.” 

“You’re crazy! What’s the big idea?” 

Pennington began, “Those British lawyers—” and 
stopped. 

“What about ’em? Surely you’re not going over to 
tackle ’em? You’re mad!” 

“I’m not suggesting that you— or I— should go to Eng- 
land.” 

“What’s the big idea, then?” 

Pennington smoothed out the letter on the table. 

“Linnet’s going to Egypt for her honeymoon. Expects 
to be there a month or more. . . 

“Egypt— eh?” 

Rockford considered. Then he looked up and met the 
other’s glance. 

“Egypt,” he said; “that's your idea!” 

“Yes— a chance meeting. Over on a trip. Linnet and her 
husband— honeymoon atmosphere. It might be done.” 

Rockford said doubtfully, “She’s sharp, Linnet is . . . 
but—” 

Pennington went on softly, “I think there might be 
ways of— managing it.” 

Again their eyes met. Rockford nodded. 

“All right, big boy.” 

Pennington looked at the clock. 

“We’ll have to hustle— whichever of us is going.” 

“You go,” said Rockford promptly. “You always made 
i hit with Linnet. ‘Uncle Andrew.’ That’s the ticket!” 

Pennington’s face had hardened. He said, “I hope I can 
pull it off.” 


34 


Death on the Nile 


“You’ve got to pull it off,” his partner said. “The situa- 
tion’s critical. . . 

XI 

William Carmichael said to the thin, weedy youth who 
opened the door inquiringly, “Send Mr. Jim to me, please.” 

Jim Fanthorp entered the room and looked inquiringly 
at his uncle. The older man looked up with a nod and a 
grunt. 

“Humph, there you are.” 

“You asked for me?” 

“Just cast an eye over this.” 

The young man sat down and drew the sheaf of papers 
toward him. The elder man watched him. 

“Well?” 

The answer came promptly, “Looks fishy to me, sir.” 

Again the senior partner of Carmichael, Grant & Car- 
michael uttered his characteristic grunt. 

Jim Fanthorp re-read the letter which had just arrived 
by air mail from Egypt: 

... It seems wicked to be writing business letters on 
such a day. We have spent a week at Mena House and 
made an expedition to the Fayum. The day after tomor- 
row we are going up the Nile to Luxor and Assuan by 
steamer , and perhaps on to Khartum. When we went into 
Cook’s this morning to see about our tickets who do you 
think was the first person l saw?— my American trustee , 
Andrew Fennington. I think you met him two years ago 
when he was over. 1 had no idea he was in Egypt and he 
had no idea that 1 was f Nor that 1 was married! My let- 
ter, telling him of my marriage, must fust have missed him. 
He is actually going up the Nile on the same trip that we 


Death on the Nile 


35 

are. Isn't it a coincidence? Thank you so much for all 
you have done in this busy time. I— 

As the young man was about to turn the page, Mr. 
Carmichael took the letter from him. 

“That’s all,” he said. “The rest doesn’t matter. Well, 
what do you think?” 

His nephew considered for a moment— then he said: 
“Well— I think— not a coincidence. . . 

The other nodded approval. 

“Like a trip to Egypt?” he barked out. 

“You think that’s advisable?” 

“I think there’s no time to lose.” 

“But why me?” 

“Use your brains, boy; use your brains. Linnet Ridge- 

[ way has never met you; no more has Pennington. If you 
go by air you may get there in time.” 

“I— I don’t like it, sir. What am I to do?” 

“Use your eyes. Use your ears. Use your brains— if 
• you’ve got any. And, if necessary— act.” 

“I-I don’t like it.” 

“Perhaps not— but you’ve got to do it.” 

“It’s— necessary?” 

“In my opinion,” said Mr. Carmichael, “it’s absolutely 
vital.” 

XII 

Mrs. Otterbourne, readjusting the turban of native ma- 
terial that she wore draped round her head, said fretfully: 

“I really don’t see why we shouldn’t go on to Egypt. 
I’m sick and tired of Jerusalem.” 

As her daughter made no reply, she said, “You might 


Death on the Nile 


3 <* 

at least answer when you’re spoken to.” 

Rosalie Otterbourne was looking at a newspaper re- 
production of a face. Below it was printed: 

Mrs. Simon Doyle, who before her marriage was the 
well-known society beauty, Miss Linnet Ridgeway. Mr. 
and Mrs. Doyle are spending their holiday in Egypt. 

Rosalie said, “You’d like to move on to Egypt, Mother?” 

“Yes, I would,” Mrs. Otterbourne snapped. “I consider 
they’ve treated us in a most cavalier fashion here. My 
being here is an advertisement— I ought to get a special 
reduction in terms. When I hinted as much, I consider 
they were most impertinent— most impertinent. I told them 
exactly what I thought of them.” 

The girl sighed. She said: “One place is very like an- 
other. I wish we could get right away.” 

“And this morning,” went on Mrs. Otterbourne, “the 
manager actually had the impertinence to tell me that all 
the rooms had been booked in advance and that he would 
require ours in two days’ time.” 

“So we’ve got to go somewhere.” 

“Not at all. I’m quite prepared to fight for my rights.” 

Rosalie murmured: “I suppose we might as well go on 
to Egypt. It doesn’t make any difference.” 

“It’s certainly not a matter of life or death,” agreed 
Mrs. Otterbourne. 

But there she was quite wrong— for a matter of life and 
death was exactly what it was. 


PART II 


EGYPT 




CHAPTER I 


“That’s Hercule Poirot, the detective,” said Mrs. 
Allerton. 

She and her son were sitting in brightly painted scarlet 
basket chairs outside the Cataract Hotel at Assuan. They 
were watching the retreating figures of two people— a 
short man dressed in a white silk suit and a tall slim girl. 

Tim Allerton sat up in an unusually alert fashion. 

“That funny little man?” he asked incredulously. 

“That funny little man!” 

“What on earth’s he doing out here?” Tim asked. 

His mother laughed. “Darling, you sound quite excited. 
Why do men enjoy crime so much? I hate detective stories 
and never read them. But I don’t think Monsieur Poirot 
is here with any ulterior motive. He’s made a good deal 
of money and he’s seeing life, I fancy.” 

“Seems to have an eye for the best looking girl in the 
place.” 

Mrs. Allerton tilted her head a little on one side as she 
considered the retreating backs of M. Poirot and his com- 
panion. 

The girl by his side overtopped him by some three 
inches. She walked well, neither stiffly nor slouchingly. 

“I suppose she is quite good-looking,” said Mrs. Aller- 
ton. 

She shot a little glance sideways at Tim. Somewhat to 
her amusement the fish rose at once. 


40 Death on the Nile 

“She’s more than quite. Pity she looks so bad-tempered 
and sulky.” 

“Perhaps that’s just expression, dear.” 

“Unpleasant young devil, I think. But she’s pretty 
enough.” 

The subject of these remarks was walking slowly by 
Poirot’s side. Rosalie Otterbourne was twirling an un- 
opened parasol, and her expression certainly bore out what 
Tim had just said. She looked both sulky and bad-tem- 
pered. Her eyebrows were drawn together in a frown, 
and the scarlet line of her mouth was drawn downward. 

They turned to the left out of the hotel gate and en- 
tered the cool shade of the public gardens. 

Hercule Poirot was prattling gently, his expression that 
of beatific good humour. He wore a white silk suit, care- 
fully pressed, and a panama hat and carried a highly orna- 
mental fly whisk with a sham amber handle. 

“—it enchants me,” he was saying. “The black rocks of 
Elephantine, and the sun, and the little boats on the river. 
Yes, it is good to be alive.” 

He paused and then added, “You do not find it so, 
Mademoiselle?” 

Rosalie Otterbourne said shortly: “It’s all right, I sup- 
pose. I think Assuan’s a gloomy sort of place. The hotel’s 
half empty, and everyone’s about a hundred—” 

She stopped— biting her lip. 

Hercule Poirot’s eyes twinkled. 

“It is true, yes, I have one leg in the grave.” 

“I— I wasn’t thinking of you,” said the girl. “Pm sorry. 
That sounded rude.” 

“Not at all. It is natural you should wish for compan- 
ions of your own age. Ah, well, there is one young man, 


Death on the Nile 


4i 


!at least.” 

“The one who sits with his mother all the time? I like 
her — but I think he looks dreadful— so conceited!” 

Poirot smiled. 

“And I— am I conceited?” 

“Oh, I don’t think so.” 

She was obviously uninterested— but the fact did not 
t seem to annoy Poirot. He merely remarked with placid 
satisfaction, “My best friend says that I am very con- 
ceited.” 

“Oh, well,” said Rosalie vaguely, “I suppose you have 
something to be conceited about. Unfortunately crime 
doesn’t interest me in the least.” 

Poirot said solemnly, “I am delighted to learn that you 
have no guilty secret to hide.” 

Just for a moment the sulky mask of her face was trans- 
formed as she shot him a swift questioning glance. Poirot 
did not seem to notice it as he went on: 

“Madame, your mother, was not at lunch today. She is 
not indisposed, I trust?” 

“This place doesn’t suit her,” said Rosalie briefly. “I 
shall be glad when we leave.” 

“We are fellow passengers, are we not? We both make 
the excursion up to Wadi Haifa and the Second Cataract?” 

“Yes.” 

They came out from the shade of the gardens onto a 
dusty stretch of road bordered by the river. Five watch- 
ful bead sellers, two vendors of postcards, three sellers of 
plaster scarabs, a couple of donkey boys and some detached 
but hopeful infantile riff-raff closed in upon them. 

“You want beads, sir? Very good, sir. Very cheap. . . .” 

“Lady, you want scarab? Look— great queen— very 


Death on the Nile 


42 

lucky. . . 

“You look, sir— real lapis. Very good, very cheap. . . .” 

“You want ride donkey, sir? This very good donkey. 
This donkey Whisky and Soda, sir. . . .” 

“You want to go granite quarries, sir? This very good 
donkey. Other donkey very bad, sir, that donkey fall 
down. . . .” 

“You want postcard— very cheap— very nice. . . .” 

“Look, lady. . . . Only ten piastres— very cheap— lapis 
—this ivory. . . .” 

“This very good fly whisk— this all amber. . . .” 

“You go out in boat, sir? I got very good boat, sir. . . .” 

“You ride back to hotel, lady? This first class don- 
key. . . .” 

Hercule Poirot made vague gestures to rid himself of 
this human cluster of flies. Rosalie stalked through them 
like a sleep walker. 

“It’s best to pretend to be deaf and blind,” she remarked. 

The infantile riff-raff ran alongside murmuring plain- 
tively: “Bakshish? Bakshish? Hip hip hurrah— very good, 
very nice. . . .” 

Their gaily coloured rags trailed picturesquely, and the 
flies lay in clusters on their eyelids. They were the most 
persistent. The others fell back and launched a fresh at- 
tack on the next comer. 

Now Poirot and Rosalie only ran the gauntlet of the 
shops— suave, persuasive accents here. . . . 

“You visit my shop today, sir?” “You want that ivory 
crocodile, sir?” “You not been in my shop yet, sir? I 
show you very beautiful things.” 

They turned into the fifth shop and Rosalie handed 
over several rolls of films— the object of the walk. 


Death on the Nile 


43 

Then they came out again and walked toward the river’s 
edge. 

One of the Nile steamers was just mooring. Poirot and 
Rosalie looked interestedly at the passengers. 

“Quite a lot, aren’t there?” commented Rosalie. 

She turned her head as Tim Allerton came up and joined 
them. He was a little out of breath as though he had been 
walking fast. 

They stood there for a moment or two and then Tim 
spoke. 

“An awful crowd as usual, I suppose,” he remarked dis- 
paragingly, indicating the disembarking passengers. 

“They’re usually quite terrible,” agreed Rosalie. 

All three wore the air of superiority assumed by people 
who are already in a place when studying new arrivals. 

“Hullo!” exclaimed Tim, his voice suddenly excited. 
“I’m damned if that isn’t Linnet Ridgeway.” 

If the information left Poirot unmoved, it stirred Rosa- 
lie’s interest. She leaned forward and her sulkiness quite 
dropped from her as she asked: “Where? That one in 
white?” 

“Yes, there with the tall man. They’re coming ashore 
now. He’s the new husband, I suppose. Can’t remember 
her name now.” 

“Doyle,” said Rosalie. “Simon Doyle. It was in all the 
newspapers. She’s simply rolling, isn’t she?” 

“Only about the richest girl in England,” replied Tim 
cheerfully. 

The three lookers-on were silent watching the passengers 
come ashore. Poirot gazed with interest at the subject of 
:he remarks of his companions. He murmured, “She is 
aeautiful.” 


44 Death on the Nile 

“Some people have got everything,” said Rosalie bit- 
terly. 

There was a queer grudging expression on her face as 
she watched the other girl come up the gangplank. 

Linnet Doyle was looking as perfectly turned out as if 
she were stepping onto the centre of the stage of a Revue. 
She had something too of the assurance of a famous actress. 
She was used to being looked at, to being admired, to 
being the centre of the stage wherever she went. 

She was aware of the keen glances bent upon her— and 
at the same time almost unaware of them; such tributes 
were part of her life. 

She came ashore playing a role, even though she played 
it unconsciously. The rich beautiful society bride on her 
honeymoon. She turned, with a little smile and a light re- 
mark, to the tall man by her side. He answered, and the 
sound of his voice seemed to interest Hercule Poirot. His 
eyes lit up and he drew his brows together. 

The couple passed close to him. He heard Simon Doyle 
say: 

“We’ll try and make time for it, darling. We can easily 
stay a week or two if you like it here.” 

His face was turned toward her, eager, adoring, a little 
humble. 

Poirot’s eyes ran over him thoughtfully— the square 
shoulders, the bronzed face, the dark blue eyes, the rather 
childlike simplicity of the smile. 

“Lucky devil,” said Tim after they had passed. “Fancy 
finding an heiress who hasn’t got adenoids and flat feet!” 

“They look frightfully happy,” said Rosalie with a note 
of envy in her voice. She added suddenly, but so low that 
Tim did not catch the words, “It isn’t fair.” 


Death on the Nile 


45 


Poirot heard, however. He had been frowning some- 
what perplexedly but now he flashed a quick glance to- 
ward her. 

Tim said, “I must collect some stuff for my mother 
now.” 

He raised his hat and moved off. Poirot and Rosalie re- 
traced their steps slowly in the direction of the hotel, wav- 
ing aside fresh proffers of donkeys. 

“So it is not fair. Mademoiselle?” asked Poirot gently. 

The girl flushed angrily. 

“I don’t know what you mean.” 

“I am repeating what you said just now under your 
breath. Oh, yes, you did.” 

Rosalie Otterbourne shrugged her shoulders. 

“It really seems a little too much for one person. Money, 
good looks, marvellous figure and—” 

She paused and Poirot said: 

“And love? Eh? And love? But you do not know— she 
may have been married for her money!” 

“Didn’t you see the way he looked at her?” 

“Oh, yes, Mademoiselle. I saw all there was to see— in- 
deed I saw something that you did not.” 

“What was that?” 

Poirot said slowly: “I saw, Mademoiselle, dark lines be- 
low a woman’s eyes. I saw a hand that clutched a sunshade 
so tight that the knuckles were white. . . .” 

Rosalie was staring at him. 

“What do you mean?” 

“I mean that all is not the gold that glitters. I mean that, 
though this lady is rich and beautiful and beloved, there 
is all the same something that is not right. And I know 
something else.” 


Death on the Nile 


46 

“Yes?” 

“I know,” said Poirot, frowning, “that somewhere, at 
some time, I have heard that voice before— the voice of 
Monsieur Doyle— and I wish I could remember where.” 

But Rosalie was not listening. She had stopped dead. 
With the point of her sunshade she was tracing patterns 
in the loose sand. Suddenly she broke out fiercely: 

“I’m odious. I’m quite odious. I’m just a beast through 
and through. I’d like to tear the clothes off her back and 
stamp on her lovely, arrogant, self-confident face. I’m just 
a jealous cat— but that’s what I feel like. She’s so horribly 
successful and poised and assured.” 

Hercule Poirot looked a little astonished by the outburst. 
He took her by the arm and gave her a friendly little shake. 

“Tenez — you will feel better for having said that!” 

“I just hate her! I’ve never hated anyone so much at first 
sight.” 

“Magnificent!” 

Rosalie looked at him doubtfully. Then her mouth 
twitched and she laughed. 

u Bien said Poirot, and laughed too. 

They proceeded amicably back to the hotel. 

“I must find Mother,” said Rosalie, as they came into 
the cool, dim hall. 

Poirot passed out on the other side onto the terrace over- 
looking the Nile. Here were little tables set for tea, but 
it was early still. He stood for a few moments looking at 
the river, then strolled down through the gardens. 

Some people were playing tennis in the hot sun. He 
paused to watch them for a while, then went on down the 
steep path. It was there, sitting on a bench overlooking 
the Nile, that he came upon the girl of Chez Ma Tante. 


Death on the Nile 


47 


He recognized her at once. Her face, as he had seen it that 
night, was securely etched upon his memory. The expres- 
sion on it now was very different. She was paler, thinner, 
and there were lines that told of a great weariness and 
misery of spirit. 

He drew back a little. She had not seen him, and he 
watched her for a while without her suspecting his pres- 
ence. Her small foot tapped impatiently on the ground. 
Her eyes, dark with a kind of smouldering fire, had a 
queer kind of suffering dark triumph in them. She was 
looking out across the Nile where the white -sailed boats 
glided up and down the river. 

A face— and a voice. He remembered them both. This 
girl’s face and the voice he had heard just now, the voice 
of a newly made bridegroom. . . . 

And even as he stood there considering the unconscious 
girl, the next scene in the drama was played. 

Voices sounded above. The girl on the seat started to 
her feet. Linnet Doyle and her husband came down the 
path. Linnet’s voice was happy and confident. The look 
of strain and tenseness of muscle had quite disappeared. 
Linnet was happy. 

The girl who was standing there took a step or two for- 
ward. The other two stopped dead. 

“Hullo, Linnet,” said Jacqueline de Belief ort. “So here 
you are! We never seem to stop running into each other. 
Hullo, Simon, how are you?” 

Linnet Doyle had shrunk back against the rock with a 
little cry. Simon Doyle’s good-looking face was suddenly 
convulsed with rage. He moved forward as though he 
would have liked to strike the slim girlish figure. 

With a quick birdlike turn of her head she signalled her 


Death on the Nile 


48 

realization of a stranger’s presence. Simon turned his head 
and noticed Poirot. He said awkwardly, “Hullo, Jacqueline; 
we didn’t expect to see you here.” 

The words were unconvincing in the extreme. 

The girl flashed white teeth at them. 

“Quite a surprise?” she asked. Then, with a little nod, 
she walked up the path. 

Poirot moved delicately in the opposite direction. As he 
went he heard Linnet Doyle say: 

“Simon— for God’s sake! Simon— what can we do?” 






,1 


CHAPTER II 


Dinner was over. The terrace outside the Cataract 
Hotel was softly lit. Most of the guests staying at the 
hotel were there sitting at little tables. 

Simon and Linnet Doyle came out, a tall, distinguished 
looking grey-haired man, with a keen, clean-shaven Amer- 
ican face, beside them. 

As the little group hesitated for a moment in the door- 
way, Tim Allerton rose from his chair near by and came 
forward. 

“You don’t remember me, I’m sure,” he said pleasantly 
to Linnet, “but I’m Joanna Southwood’s cousin.” 

“Of course— how stupid of me! You’re Tim Allerton. 
This is my husband”— a faint tremor in the voice, pride, 
shyness?— “and this is my American trustee, Mr. Penning- 


ton. 


Tim said, “You must meet my mother.” 

A few minutes later they were sitting together in a party 
—Linnet in the corner, Tim and Pennington each side of 
her, both talking to her, vying for her attention. Mrs. Al- 
lerton talked to Simon Doyle. 

The swing doors revolved. A sudden tension came into 
the beautiful upright figure sitting in the corner between 
the two men. Then it relaxed as a small man came out and 
walked across the terrace. 

Mrs. Allerton said: “You’re not the only celebrity here, 
my dear. That funny little man is Hercule Poirot.” 


49 


50 


Death on the Nile 


She had spoken lightly, just out of instinctive social tact 
to bridge an awkward pause, but Linnet seemed struck 
by the information. 

“Hercule Poirot? Of course— I’ve heard of him. . . .” 

She seemed to sink into a fit of abstraction. The two 
men on either side of her were momentarily at a loss. 

Poirot had strolled across to the edge of the terrace, but 
his attention was immediately solicited. 

“Sit down, Monsieur Poirot. What a lovely night.” 

He obeyed. 

u Mais oui, Madame, it is indeed beautiful.” 

He smiled politely at Mrs. Otterbourne. What draperies 
of black ninon and that ridiculous turban effect! Mrs. 
Otterbourne went on in her high complaining voice: 

“Quite a lot of notabilities here now, aren’t there? I ex- 
pect we shall see a paragraph about it in the papers soon. 
Society beauties, famous novelists—” 

She paused with a slight mock-modest laugh. 

Poirot felt, rather than saw, the sulky frowning girl op- 
posite him flinch and set her mouth in a sulkier line than 
before. 

“You have a novel on the way at present, Madame?” 
he inquired. 

Mrs. Otterbourne gave her little self-conscious laugh 
again. 

“I’m being dreadfully lazy. I really must set to. My pub- 
lic is getting terribly impatient— and my publisher, poor 
man! Appeals by every post! Even cables!” 

Again he felt the girl shift in the darkness. 

“I don’t mind telling you, Monsieur Poirot, I am partly 
here for local colour. Snow on the Desert’s Face — that is 
the title of my new book. Powerful— suggestive. Snow— 


Death on the Nile 


5i 


on the desert— melted in the first flaming breath of passion.” 

Rosalie got up, muttering something, and moved away 
down into the dark garden. 

“One must be strong,” went on Mrs. Otterbourne, wag- 
ging the turban emphatically. “Strong meat— that is what 
my books are— all important. Libraries banned— no matter! 
I speak the truth. Sex— ah! Monsieur Poirot— why is every- 
one so afraid of sex? The pivot of the universe! You have 
read my books?” 

“Alas, Madame! You comprehend, I do not read many 
novels. My work—” 

Mrs. Otterbourne said firmly: “I must give you a copy 
of Under the Fig Tree. I think you will find it significant. 
It is outspoken— but it is real!” 

“That is most kind of you, Madame. I will read it with 
pleasure.” 

Mrs. Otterbourne was silent a minute or two. She 
fidgeted with a long chain of beads that was wound twice 
round her neck. She looked swiftly from side to side. 

“Perhaps— I’ll just slip up and get it for you now.” 

“Oh, Madame, pray do not trouble yourself. Later—” 

“No, no. It’s no trouble.” She rose. “I’d like to show 
l you—” 

“What is it, Mother?” 

Rosalie was suddenly at her side. 

“Nothing, dear. I was just going up to get a book for 
Monsieur Poirot.” 

“The Fig Tree? I’ll get it.” 

“You don’t know where it is, dear. I’ll go.” 

“Yes, I do.” 

The girl went swiftly across the terrace and into the 
hotel. 


52 


Death on the Nile 


“Let me congratulate you, Madame, on a very lovely 
daughter,” said Poirot, with a bow. 

“Rosalie? Yes, yes— she is good-looking. But she’s very 
hard, Monsieur Poirot. And no sympathy with illness. She 
always thinks she knows best. She imagines she knows 
more about my health than I do myself—” 

Poirot signalled to a passing waiter. 

“A liqueur, Madame? A chartreuse? A creme de 
menthe?” 

Mrs. Otterbourne shook her head vigorously. 

“No, no. I am practically a teetotaller. You may have 
noticed I never drink anything but water— or perhaps 
lemonade. I cannot bear the taste of spirits.” 

“Then may I order you a lemon squash, Madame?” 

He gave the order— one lemon squash and one Benedic- 
tine. 

The swing door revolved. Rosalie passed through and 
came toward them, a book in her hand. 

“Here you are,” she said. Her voice was quite expres- 
sionless— almost remarkably so. 

“Monsieur Poirot has just ordered me a lemon squash,” 
said her mother. 

“And you, Mademoiselle, what will you take?” 

“Nothing.” She added, suddenly conscious of the curt- 
ness, “Nothing, thank you.” 

Poirot took the volume which Mrs. Otterbourne held 
out to him. It still bore its original jacket, a gaily coloured 
affair representing a lady, with smartly shingled hair and 
scarlet fingernails, sitting on a tiger skin, in the traditional 
costume of Eve. Above her was a tree with the leaves of 
an oak, bearing large and improbably coloured apples. 

It was entitled Under the Fig Tree, by Salome Otter- 


Death on the Nile 


53 


bourne. On the inside was a publisher’s blurb. It spoke 
enthusiastically of the superb courage and realism of this 
study of a modern woman’s love life. “Fearless, uncon- 
ventional, realistic,” were the adjectives used. 

Poirot bowed and murmured, “I am honoured, Madame.” 

As he raised his head, his eyes met those of the au- 
thoress’s daughter. Almost involuntarily he made a little 
movement. He was astonished and grieved at the eloquent 
pain they revealed. 

It was at that moment that the drinks arrived and cre- 
ated a welcome diversion. 

Poirot lifted his glass gallantly. 

11 A votre sante, Madame— Mademoiselle” 

Mrs. Otterbourne, sipping her lemonade, murmured, “So 
refreshing— delicious! ” 

Silence fell on the three of them. They looked down to 
the shining black rocks in the Nile. There was something 
fantastic about them in the moonlight. They were like 
vast prehistoric monsters lying half out of the water. A 
tittle breeze came up suddenly and as suddenly died away. 
There was a feeling in the air of hush— of expectancy. 

Hercule Poirot brought his gaze back to the terrace and 
its occupants. Was he wrong, or was there the same hush 
of expectancy there? It was like a moment on the stage 
when one is waiting for the entrance of the leading lady. 

And just at that moment the swing doors began to re- 
volve once more. This time it seemed as though they did 
so with a special air of importance. Everyone had stopped 
talking and was looking toward them. 

A dark slender girl in a wine coloured evening frock 
came through. She paused for a minute, then walked de- 
liberately across the terrace and sat down at an empty 


54 


Death on the Nile 


table. There was nothing flaunting, nothing out of the way 
about her demeanour, and yet it had somehow the studied 
effect of a stage entrance. 

“Well,” said Mrs. Otterbourne. She tossed her turbaned 
head. “She seems to think she is somebody, that girl!” 

Poirot did not answer. He was watching. The girl had 
sat down in a place where she could look deliberately 
across at Linnet Doyle. Presently, Poirot noticed, Linnet 
Doyle leant forward and said something and a moment 
later got up and changed her seat. She was now sitting 
facing in the opposite direction. 

Poirot nodded thoughtfully to himself. 

It was about five minutes later that the other girl 
changed her seat to the opposite side of the terrace. She 
sat smoking and smiling quietly, the picture of contented 
ease. But always, as though unconsciously, her meditative 
gaze was on Simon Doyle’s wife. 

After a quarter of an hour Linnet Doyle got up ab- 
ruptly and went into the hotel. Her husband followed her 
almost immediately. 

Jacqueline de Belief ort smiled and twisted her chair 
round. She lit a cigarette and stared out over the Nile. 
She went on smiling to herself. 


CHAPTER III 


1 “Monsieur Poirot.” 

:! Poirot got hastily to his feet. He had remained sitting 
out on the terrace alone after everyone else had left. Lost 
: in meditation he had been staring at the smooth shiny 
black rocks when the sound of his name recalled him to 
himself. 

1 It was a well-bred, assured voice, a charming voice, 
f although perhaps a trifle arrogant. 

1 Hercule Poirot, rising quickly, looked into the com- 
! manding eyes of Linnet Doyle. She wore a wrap of rich 
purple velvet over her white satin gown and she looked 
' more lovely and more regal than Poirot had imagined pos- 
[ sible. 

“You are Monsieur Hercule Poirot?” said Linnet. 

’ It was hardly a question. 

“At your service, Madame.” 

“You know who I am, perhaps?” 

“Yes, Madame. I have heard your name. I know exactly 
who you are.” 

Linnet nodded. That was only what she had expected. 
She went on, in her charming autocratic manner: “Will 
pou come with me into the card room, Monsieur Poirot? 

[ am very anxious to speak to you.” 

“Certainly, Madame.” 

She led the way into the hotel. He followed. She led 
lim into the deserted card room and motioned him to 

55 


Death on the Nile 


5 <> 

close the door. Then she sank down on a chair at one of 
the tables and he sat down opposite her. 

She plunged straightaway into what she wanted to say. 
There were no hesitations. Her speech came flowingly. 

“I have heard a great deal about you, Monsieur Poirot, 
and I know that you are a very clever man. It happens 
that I am urgently in need of someone to help me— and I 
think very possibly that you are the man who could do it.” 

Poirot inclined his head. 

“You are very amiable, Madame, but you see, I am on 
holiday, and when I am on holiday I do not take cases.” 

“That could be arranged.” 

It was not offensively said— only with the quiet confi- 
dence of a young woman who had always been able to 
arrange matters to her satisfaction. 

Linnet Doyle went on: “I am the subject, Monsieur ' 
Poirot, of an intolerable persecution. That persecution has ; 
got to stop! My own idea was to go to the police about 
it, but my— my husband seems to think that the police ' 
would be powerless to do anything.” 

“Perhaps— if you would explain a little further?” mur- 
mured Poirot politely. 

“Oh, yes, I will do so. The matter is perfectly simple.” 1 

There was still no hesitation— no faltering. Linnet Doyle ^ 
had a clear-cut businesslike mind. She only paused a min- 1 ! 
ute so as to present the facts as concisely as possible. 

“Before I met my husband, he was engaged to a Miss 
de Bellefort. She was also a friend of mine. My husband t 
broke off his engagement to her— they were not suited in 
any way. She, I am sorry to say, took it rather hard. . . . c 
I— am very sorry about that— but these things cannot be 
helped. She made certain— well, threats— to which I paid J ; 

I 


Death on the Nile 


57 


^ery little attention, and which, I may say, she has not at- 
empted to carry out. But instead she has adopted the ex- 
raordinary course of— of following us about wherever we 

>°” . 

Poirot raised his eyebrows. 

“Ah— rather an unusual— er— revenge.” 

“Very unusual— and very ridiculous! But also— annoy- 
ng. 

She bit her lip. 

Poirot nodded. 

“Yes, I can imagine that. You are, I understand, on your 
loneymoon? ” 

“Yes. It happened— the first time— at Venice. She was 
here— at Danielli’s. I thought it was just coincidence. 
Lather embarrassing, but that was all. Then we found 
ier on board the boat at Brindisi. We— we understood that 
he was going on to Palestine. We left her, as we thought, 
>n the boat. But— but when we got to Mena House she 
/as there— waiting for us.” 

Poirot nodded. 

“And now?” 

“We came up the Nile by boat. I— I was half expecting 
o find her on board. When she wasn’t there I thought she 
ad stopped being so— so childish. But when we got here— 
ae— she was here— waiting.” 

Poirot eyed her keenly for a moment. She was still per- 
ectly composed, but the knuckles of the hand that was 
ripping the table were white with the force of her grip. 

He said, “And you are afraid this state of things may 
ontinue?” 

“Yes.” She paused. “Of course the whole thing is idiotic! 
icqueline is making herself utterly ridiculous. I am sur- 


Death on the Nile 


58 

prised she hasn’t got more pride— more dignity.” 1 

Poirot made a slight gesture. 

“There are times, Madame, when pride and dignity— 
they go by the board! There are other— stronger emo- 
tions.” 

“Yes, possibly.” Linnet spoke impatiently. “But what on 
earth can she hope to gain by all this?” 

“It is not always a question of gain, Madame.” 

Something in his tone struck Linnet disagreeably. She 
flushed and said quickly: “You are right. A discussion of 
motives : s beside the point. The crux of the matter is that 
this has got to be stopped.” 

“And how do you propose that that should be accom- 
plished, Madame?” Poirot asked. 

“Well— naturally— my husband and I cannot continue 
being subjected to this annoyance. There must be some 
kind of legal redress against such a thing.” 

She spoke impatiently. Poirot looked at her thought- 
fully as he asked: “Has she threatened you in actual words 
in public? Used insulting language? Attempted any bodily 
harm?” 

“No.” 

“Then, frankly, Madame, I do not see what you can do. 
If it is a young lady’s pleasure to travel in certain places, 
and those places are the same where you and your hus- 
band find themselves — eh bien — what of it? The air is free 
to all! There is no question of her forcing herself upon 
your privacy? It is always in public that these encounters 
take place?” 

“You mean there is nothing that I can do about it?” 

Linnet sounded incredulous. 

Poirot said placidly: “Nothing at all as far as I can see. 


Death on the Nile 


59 


Mademoiselle de Bellefort is within her rights.” 

“But— but it is maddening! It is intolerable that I should 
lave to put up with this!” 

Poirot said drily, “I sympathize with you, Madame— 
especially as I imagine that you have not often had to put 
ip with things.” 

Linnet was frowning. 

“There must be some way of stopping it,” she mur- 
nured. 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“You can always leave— move on somewhere : ‘;lse,” he 
;uggested. 

“Then she will follow!” 

“Very possibly— yes.” 

“It’s absurd!” 

“Precisely.” 

“Anyway, why should I— we— run away? As though- 
ts though—” 

She stopped. 

“Exactly, Madame. As though—! It is all there, is it not?” 

Linnet lifted her head and stared at him. 

“What do you mean?” 

Poirot altered his tone. He leant forward; his voice was 
onfidential, appealing. He said very gently, “Why do you 
mind so much, Madame?” 

( “Why? But it’s maddening! Irritating to the last degree! 

11 ’ve told you why!” 

5 Poirot shook his head. 

“Not altogether.” 

“What do you mean?” Linnet asked again. 

Poirot leant back, folded his arms and spoke in a de- 
c ' iched impersonal manner. 


6o 


Death on the Nile 


“ Ecoutez , Madame. I will recount to you a little history. 
It is that one day, a month or two ago, I am dining in a 
restaurant in London. At the table next to me are two 
people, a man and a girl. They are very happy, so it seems, 
very much in love. They talk with confidence of the fu- 
ture. It is not that I listen to what is not meant for me; 
they are quite oblivious of who hears them and who does 
not. The man’s back is to me, but I can watch the girl’s 
face. It is very intense. She is in love— heart, soul and body 
—and she is not of those who love lightly and often. With 
her it is clearly the life and the death. They are engaged 
to be married, these two; that is what I gather; and they 
talk of where they shall pass the days of their honeymoon. 
They plan to go to Egypt.” 

He paused. Linnet said sharply, “Well?” 

Poirot went on: “That is a month or two ago, but the 
girl’s face— I do not forget it. I know that I shall remember 
if I see it again. And I remember too the man’s voice. 
And I think you can guess, Madame, when it is I see the 
one and hear the other again. It is here in Egypt. The man 
is on his honeymoon, yes— but he is on his honeymoon 
with another woman.” 

Linnet said sharply: “What of it? I had already men- 
tioned the facts.” 

“The facts— yes.” ; 

“Well then?” I 

Poirot said slowly: “The girl in the restaurant men- 
tioned a friend— a friend who, she was very positive, 
would not let her down. That friend, I think, was you, 
Madame.” 

Linnet flushed. 

“Yes. I told you we had been friends.” 


1 ! 


Death on the Nile 


6 1 


“And she trusted you?” 

“Yes” 

She hesitated for a moment, biting her lip impatiently; 
•then, as Poirot did not seem disposed to speak, she broke 
put: 

“Of course the whole thing was very unfortunate. But 
:hese things happen, Monsieur Poirot.” 

“Ah! yes, they happen, Madame.” He paused. “You are 
pf the Church of England I presume?” 

“Yes.” Linnet looked slightly bewildered. 

“Then you have heard portions of the Bible read aloud 
n church. You have heard of King David and of the rich 
man who had many flocks and herds and the poor man 
who had one ewe lamb— and of how the rich man took the 
poor man’s one ewe lamb. That was something that hap- 
pened, Madame.” 

Linnet sat up. Her eyes flashed angrily. 

“I see perfectly what you are driving at, Monsieur 
Apirot! You think, to put it vulgarly, that I stole my 
r'riend’s young man. Looking at the matter sentimentally 
-which is, I suppose, the way people of your generation 
:annot help looking at things— that is possibly true. But 
he real hard truth is different. I don’t deny that Jackie 
vas passionately in love with Simon, but I don’t think 
/ou take into account that he may not have been equally 
ievoted to her. He was very fond of her, but I think that 
;ven before he met me he was beginning to feel that he 
lad made a mistake. Look at it clearly, Monsieur Poirot, 
iimon discovers that it is I he loves, not Jackie. What is 
le to do? Be heroically noble and marry a woman he does 
lot care for— and thereby probably ruin three lives— for it 
s doubtful whether he could make Jackie happy under 


6i 


Death on the Nile 


those circumstances? If he were actually married to her 
when he met me I agree that it might be his duty to stick 
to her— though I’m not really sure of that. If one person is 
unhappy the other suffers too. But an engagement is not 
really binding. If a mistake has been made, then surely it is 
better to face the fact before it is too late. I admit that it 
was very hard on Jackie, and I’m terribly sorry about it— 
but there it is. It was inevitable.” 

“I wonder.” 

She stared at him. 

“What do you mean?” 

“It is very sensible, very logical— all that you say! But 
it does not explain one thing.” 

“What is that?” 

“Your own attitude, Madame. See you, this pursuit of 
you, you might take it in two ways. It might cause you 
annoyance— yes, or it might stir your pity— that your friend 
should have been so deeply hurt as to throw all regards 
for the conventions aside. But that is not the way you react. 
No, to you this persecution is intolerable — and why? It can: 
be for one reason only— that you feel a sense of guilt.” 

Linnet sprang to her feet. 

“How dare you? Really, Monsieur Poirot, this is going 
too far.” 

“But I do dare, Madame! I am going to speak to you 
quite frankly. I suggest to you that, although you may 
have endeavoured to gloss over the fact to yourself, you did 
deliberately set about taking your husband from your 
friend. I suggest that you felt strongly attracted to him at 
once. But I suggest that there was a moment when you 
hesitated, when you realized that there was a choice- 
that you could refrain or go on. I suggest that the initia- 


Death on the Nile 


63 

five rested with you — not with Monsieur Doyle. You are 
beautiful, Madame; you are rich; you are clever, intelli- 
gent— and you have charm. You could have exercised that 
charm or you could have restrained it. You had every- 
thing, Madame, that life can offer. Your friend’s life was 
bound up in one person. You knew that, but, though you 
hesitated, you did not hold your hand. You stretched it 
out and, like the rich man in the Bible, you took the poor 
nan’s one ewe lamb.” 

There was a silence. Linnet controlled herself with an 
effort and said in a cold voice, “All this is quite beside the 
point!” 

“No, it is not beside the point. I am explaining to you 
just why the unexpected appearances of Mademoiselle de 
Bellefort have upset you so much. It is because, though she 
may be unwomanly and undignified in what she is doing, 
pou have the inner conviction that she has right on her 
side.” 

“That’s not true!” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“You refuse to be honest with yourself.” 

“Not at all.” 

Poirot said gently, “I should say, Madame, that you have 
bad a happy life, that you have been generous and kindly 
in your attitude toward others.” 

“I have tried to be,” said Linnet. The impatient anger 
died out of her face. She spoke simply— almost forlornly. 

“And that is why the feeling that you have deliberately 
caused injury to someone upsets you so much, and why 
you are so reluctant to admit the fact. Pardon me if I have 
aeen impertinent, but the psychology, it is the most im- 
aortant fact in a case.” 


Death on the Nile 


64 

Linnet said slowly: “Even supposing what you say were 
true— and I don’t admit it, mind— what can be done about 
it now? One can’t alter the past; one must deal with things 
as they are.” 

Poirot nodded. 

“You have the clear brain. Yes, one cannot go back over j 
the past. One must accept things as they are. And some- ! 
times, Madame, that is all one can do— accept the conse- 
quences of one’s past deeds.” 

“You mean,” asked Linnet incredulously, “that I can do 
nothing— nothing?” 

“You must have courage, Madame; that is what it seems 
like to me.” 

Linnet said slowly: 

“Couldn’t you— talk to Jackie— to Miss de Bellefort? 
Reason with her?” 

“Yes, I could do that. I will do that if you would like 
me to do so. But do not expect much result. I fancy that 
Mademoiselle de Bellefort is so much in the grip of a fixed 
idea that nothing will turn her from it.” 

“But surely we can do something to extricate ourselves?” 

“You could, of course, return to England and establish 
yourself in your own house.” 

“Even then, I suppose, Jacqueline is capable of plant- 
ing herself in the village, so that I should see her every 
time I went out of the grounds.” 

“True.” 

“Besides,” said Linnet slowly, “I don’t think that Simon 
would agree to run away.” 

“What is his attitude in this?” 

“He’s furious— simply furious.” 

Poirot nodded thoughtfully. 


Death on the Nile 


<55 


Linnet said appealingly, “You will— talk to her?” 

“Yes, I will do that. But it is my opinion that I shall not 
ae able to accomplish anything.” 

Linnet said violently: “Jackie is extraordinary! One can’t 
tell what she will do!” 

“You spoke just now of certain threats she had made. 
Would you tell me what those threats were?” 

Linnet shrugged her shoulders. 

“She threatened to— well— kill us both. Jackie can be 
rather— Latin sometimes.” 

“I see.” Poirot’s tone was grave. 

Linnet turned to him appealingly. 

“You will act for me?” 

“No, Madame.” His tone was firm. “I will not accept a 
commission from you. I will do what I can in the interests 
of humanity. That, yes. There is here a situation that is 
r ull of difficulty and danger. I will do what I can to clear 
it up— but I am not very sanguine as to my chance of 
success.” 

Linnet Doyle said slowly, “But you will not act for 
me?” 

“No, Madame,” said Hercule Poirot. 


CHAPTER IV 


1 


Hercule Poirot found Jacqueline de Bellefort sitting; $ 
on the rocks directly overlooking the Nile. He had felt 
fairly certain that she had not retired for the night and 
that he would find her somewhere about the grounds of 
the hotel. 

She was sitting with her chin cupped in the palms of her 
hands, and she did not turn her head or look round at the 
sound of his approach. 

“Mademoiselle de Bellefort?” asked Poirot. “You per- 
mit that I speak to you for a little moment?” t 

Jacqueline turned her head slightly. A faint smile played 
round her lips. 

“Certainly,” she said. “You are Monsieur Hercule Poirot, 

I think? Shall I make a guess? You are acting for Mrs. { 
Doyle, who has promised you a large fee if you succeed in i 
your mission.” 

Poirot sat down on the bench near her. 

“Your assumption is partially correct,” he said, smiling, i 
“I have just come from Madame Doyle, but I am not ac- 
cepting any fee from her and, strictly speaking, I am not 
acting for her.” 

“Oh!” 

Jacqueline studied him attentively. 

“Then why have you come?” she asked abruptly. 

Hercule Poirot’s reply was in the form of another 
question. 


66 


Death on the Nile 


67 


“Have you ever seen me before, Mademoiselle?” 

She shook her head. 

“No, I do not think so.” 

“Yet I have seen you. I sat next to you once at Chez Ma 
Tante. You were there with Monsieur Simon Doyle.” 

A strange masklike expression came over the girl’s face. 
Ihe said, “I remember that evening. . . .” 

“Since then,” said Poirot, “many things have occurred.” 

“As you say, many things have occurred.” 

Her voice was hard with an undertone of desperate bit- 
erness. 

“Mademoiselle, I speak as a friend. Bury your dead!” 

She looked startled. 

“What do you mean?” 

“Give up the past! Turn to the future! What is done is 
lone. Bitterness will not undo it.” 

“I’m sure that that would suit dear Linnet admirably.” 

Poirot made a gesture. 

“I am not thinking of her at this moment! I am thinking 
f you. You have suffered— yes— but what you are doing 
ow will only prolong that suffering.” 

She shook her head. 

“You’re wrong. There are times when I almost enjoy 
lyself.” 

“And that, Mademoiselle, is the worst of all.” 

She looked up swiftly. 

“You’re not stupid,” she said. She added slowly, “I be- 
eve you mean to be kind.” 

“Go home, Mademoiselle. You are young; you have 
rains; the world is before you.” 

Jacqueline shook her head slowly. 

“You don’t understand— or you won’t. Simon is my 


Death on the Nile 


68 

world.” 

“Love is not everything, Mademoiselle,” Poirot said, 
gently. “It is only when we are young that we think it is.”| 
But the girl still shook her head. 

“You don’t understand.” She shot him a quick look. s 
“You know all about it, of course? You’ve talked to 
Linnet? And you were in the restaurant that night. . . 
Simon and I loved each other.” jj, 

“I know that you loved him.” j 

She was quick to perceive the inflection of his words, p 
She repeated with emphasis: \ 

“We loved each other. And I loved Linnet. . . . I a 
trusted her. She was my best friend. All her life Linnet has ] 
been able to buy everything she wanted. She’s never denied T 
herself anything. When she saw Simon she wanted him- 
and she just took him.” 

“And he allowed himself to be— bought?” 

Jacqueline shook her dark head slowly. 

“No, it’s not quite like that. If it were, I shouldn’t be,; 
here now. . . . You’re suggesting that Simon isn’t word's; 
caring for. ... If he’d married Linnet for her moneyl 
that would be true. But he didn’t marry her for her money 
It’s more complicated than that. There’s such a thing a: 
glamour, Monsieur Poirot. And money helps that. Linneq 
had an ‘atmosphere,’ you see. She was the queen of aL 
kingdom— the young princess— luxurious to her fingertips, | 0 
It was like a stage setting. She had the world at her feet 
one of the richest and most sought after peers in Englanc t(: 
wanting to marry her. And she stoops instead to the oblj 
scure Simon Doyle. . . . Do you wonder it went to hi aT 
head?” She made a sudden gesture. “Look at the moon u^ 
there. You see her very plainly, don’t you? She’s vem 


Death on the Nile 


69 

bal. But if the sun were to shine you wouldn’t be able to 
:e her at all. It was rather like that. I was the moon. . . . 
Vhen the sun came out, Simon couldn’t see me any more. 
. . He was dazzled. He couldn’t see anything but the 
in— Linnet.” 

She paused and then went on: “So you see it was— 
lamour. She went to his head. And then there’s her com- 
lete assurance— her habit of command. She’s so sure of 
erself that she makes other people sure. Simon was weak, 
erhaps; but then he’s a very simple person. He would 
ave loved me and me only if Linnet hadn’t come along 
fd snatched him up in her golden chariot. And I know- 
know perfectly— that he wouldn’t ever have fallen in love 
r ith her if she hadn’t made him.” 

“That is what you think— yes.” 

“I know it. He loved me— he will always love me.” 
Poirot said, “Even now?” 

A quick answer seemed to rise to her lips, then be 
lifled. She looked at Poirot and a deep burning colour 

I »read over her face. She looked away; her head dropped 
awn. She said in a low stifled voice: “Yes, I know. He 
ites me now. Yes, hates me. . . . He’d better be careful!” 
With a quick gesture she fumbled in a little silk bag that 
fy on the seat. Then she held out her hand. On the palm 
1: it was a small pearl-handled pistol— a dainty toy it 
] oked. 

( “Nice little thing, isn’t it?” she said. “Looks too foolish 
! > be real, but it is real! One of those bullets would kill a 
an or a woman. And I’m a good shot.” She smiled a far- 
Ivay, reminiscent smile. “When I went home as a child 
Mth my mother, to South Carolina, my grandfather taught 
1 e to shoot. He was the old-fashioned kind that believes in 


70 


Death on the Nile 


shooting— especially where honour is concerned. My father, ] 
too, he fought several duels as a young man. He was a : coi 
good swordsman. He killed a man once. That was over aitni 
woman. So you see, Monsieur Poirot”— she met his eyesw 
squarely— “I’ve hot blood in me! I bought this when it 
first happened. I meant to kill one or other of them— theito 
trouble was I couldn’t decide which. Both of them would ! 
have been unsatisfactory. If I’d thought Linnet would have 111 ! 
looked afraid— but she’s got plenty of physical courage. ' 
She can stand up to physical action. And then I thought) joi 
I’d— wait! That appealed to me more and more. After all, ' 
I could do it any time; it would be more fun to wait and- ' 
think about it! And then this idea came to my mind— to J 
follow them! Whenever they arrived at some faraway spot 1 
and were together and happy, they should see Me! And itjfoi 
worked! It got Linnet badly— in a way nothing else couldjy 
have done! It got right under her skin. . . . That wa% 
when I began to enjoy myself. . . . And there’s nothing | 
she can do about it! I’m always perfectly pleasant and po-j| E 
lite! There’s not a word they can take hold of! It’s poison- j 
ing everything— everything— for them.” 

Her laugh rang out, clear and silvery. 

Poirot grasped her arm. 

“Be quiet. Quiet, I tell you.” 

Jacqueline looked at him. 

“Well?” she asked. Her smile was definitely challenging 

“Mademoiselle, I beseech you, do not do what you are 
doing.” 

“Leave dear Linnet alone, you mean?” 

“It is deeper than that. Do not open your heart to evil. 

Her lips fell apart; a look of bewilderment came into 
her eyes. 


lse 


1 


Death on the Nile 


7 1 


Poirot went on gravely: “Because— if you do— evil will 
ome. . . . Yes, very surely evil will come. ... It will 
nter in and make its home within you, and after a little 
diile it will no longer be possible to drive it out.” 

Jacqueline stared at him. Her glance seemed to waver, 
a flicker uncertainly. 

She said, “I— don’t know—” Then she cried out defiantly, 
You can’t stop me.” 

“No,” said Hercule Poirot. “I cannot stop you.” His 
oice was sad. 

“Even if I were to— kill her, you couldn’t stop me.” 

“No— not if you were willing to pay the price.” 

Jacqueline de Belief ort laughed. 

“Oh, I’m not afraid of death! What have I got to live 
3r, after all? I suppose you believe it’s very wrong to 
ill a person who has injured you— even if they’ve taken 
ivay everything you had in the world?” 

Poirot said steadily: “Yes, Mademoiselle. I believe it is 
le unforgivable offence— to kill.” 

Jacqueline laughed again. 

“Then you ought to approve of my present scheme of 

! :venge; because, you see, as long as it works, I shan’t 
>e that pistol. . . . But I’m afraid— yes, afraid sometimes 
it all goes red— I want to hurt her— to stick a knife into 
er, to put my dear little pistol close against her head and 
ien— just press with my finger— Oh!” 

The exclamation startled him. 

“What is it, Mademoiselle?” 

She had turned her head and was staring into the 
ladows. 

“Someone— standing over there. He’s gone now.” 
Hercule Poirot looked round sharply. 


7 2 


Death on the Nile 


f 

. 


The place seemed quite deserted. 

“There seems no one here but ourselves, Mademoiselle.’’ 
He got up. “In any case I have said all I came to say. 1 
wish you good-night.” 

Jacqueline got up too. She said almost pleadingly, “You 
do understand— that I can’t do what you ask me to do?’ 

Poirot shook his head. q 

“No— for you could do it! There is always a moment!: fj 
Your friend Linnet— there was a moment, too, in wind'd 
she could have held her hand. . . . She let it pass by. And 
if one does that, then one is committed to the enterprise 
and there comes no second chance.” 

“No second chance. . . .” said Jacqueline de Bellefort ,, 0 

She stood brooding for a moment; then she lifted he] 
head defiantly. 

“Good-night, Monsieur Poirot.” id 

He shook his head sadly and followed her up the pad j^j, 
to the hotel. 1 


CHAPTER V 


)n the following morning Simon Doyle joined 
lercule Poirot as the latter was leaving the hotel to walk 
own to the town. 

“Good-morning, Monsieur Poirot.” 

“Good-morning, Monsieur Doyle.” 

“You going to the town? Mind if I stroll along with 
ou?” 

“But certainly. I shall be delighted.” 

The two men walked side by side, passed out through 
te gateway and turned into the cool shade of the gardens, 
hen Simon removed his pipe from his mouth and said, 
1 understand, Monsieur Poirot, that my wife had a talk 
nth you last night?” 

“That is so.” 

Simon Doyle was frowning a little. He belonged to that 
/pe of men of action who find it difficult to put thoughts 
ito words and who have trouble in expressing themselves 
iearly. 

“I’m glad of one thing,” he said. “You’ve made her 
;alize that we’re more or less powerless in the matter.” 
“There is clearly no legal redress,” agreed Poirot. 
“Exactly. Linnet didn’t seem to understand that.” He 
ave a faint smile. “Linnet’s been brought up to believe 
lat every annoyance can automatically be referred to the 
olice.” 

“It would be pleasant if such were the case,” said 

73 


Death on the Nile 


74 

Poirot. 

There was a pause. Then Simon said suddenly, his face 
going very red as he spoke: 

“It’s— it’s infamous that she should be victimized like this! 
She’s done nothing! If anyone likes to say I behaved like a 
cad, they’re welcome to say so! I suppose I did. But I won’t 
have the whole thing visited on Linnet. She had nothing 
whatever to do with it.” 

Poirot bowed his head gravely but said nothing. 

“Did you— er— have you— talked to Jackie— Miss de 
Belief ort?” 

“Yes, I have spoken with her.” 

“Did you get her to see sense?” 

“I’m afraid not.” 

Simon broke out irritably: “Can’t she see what an ass 
she’s making of herself? Doesn’t she realize that no decent 
woman would behave as she is doing? Hasn’t she got any 
pride or self-respect?” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“She has only a sense of— injury, shall we say?” he re- 
plied. 

“Yes, but damn it all, man, decent girls don’t behave 
like this! I admit I was entirely to blame. I treated her 
damned badly and all that. I should quite understand her 
being thoroughly fed up with me and never wishing to see 
me again. But this following me round— it’s— it’s indecent 1 
Making a show of herself! What the devil does she hope 
to get out of it?” 

“Perhaps— revenge! ” 

“Idiotic! I’d really understand better if she’d tried to dc 
something melodramatic— like taking a pot shot at me.” 

“You think that would be more like her— yes?” 


Death on the Nile 


75 


“Frankly I do. She’s hot-blooded— and she’s got an un- 
governable temper. I shouldn’t be surprised at her doing 
anything while she was in a white-hot rage. But this spy- 
ing business—” He shook his head. 

“It is more subtle— yes! It is intelligent!” 

Doyle stared at him. 

“You don’t understand. It’s playing hell with Linnet’s 
nerves.” 

“And yours?” 

Simon looked at him with momentary surprise. 

“Me? I’d like to wring the little devil’s neck.” 

“There is nothing, then, of the old feeling left?” 

“My dear Monsieur Poirot— how can I put it? It’s like 
the moon when the sun comes out. You don’t know it’s 
there any more. When once I’d met Linnet— Jackie didn’t 
exist.” 

“ Tiens , c'est dr ole ga!” muttered Poirot. 

“I beg your pardon.” 

“Your simile interested me, that is all.” 

Again flushing, Simon said: “I suppose Jackie told you 
that I’d only married Linnet for her money? Well, that’s 
a damned lie! I wouldn’t marry any woman for money! 
What Jackie doesn’t understand is that it’s difficult for a 
fellow when— when— a woman cares for him as she cared 
for me.” r 

“Ah?” 

Poirot looked up sharply. 

Simon blundered on, “It— it— sounds a caddish thing to 
say, but Jackie was too fond of me!” 

u Un qni aime et un qui se laisse aimer” murmured 
Poirot. 

“Eh? What’s that you say? You see a man doesn’t want 


Death on the Nile 


76 

to feel that a woman cares more for him than he does for 
her.” His voice grew warm as he went on. “He doesn’t 
want to feel owned, body and soul. It’s that damned pos- 
sessive attitude! This man is mine — he belongs to me! That’s 
the sort of thing I can’t stick— no man could stick! He 
wants to get away— to get free. He wants to own his 
woman; he doesn’t want her to own him .” 

He broke off, and with fingers that trembled slightly he 
lit a cigarette. 

Poirot said, “And it is like that that you felt with Made- 
moiselle Jacqueline?” 

“Eh?” Simon stared and then admitted: “Er— yes— well, 
yes, as a matter of fact I did. She doesn’t realize that, of 
course. And it’s not the sort of thing I could ever tell her. 
But I was feeling restless— and then I met Linnet, and she 
just swept me off my feet! I’d never seen anything so 
lovely. It was all so amazing. Everyone kowtowing to her 
—and then her singling out a poor chump like me.” 

His tone held boyish awe and astonishment. 

“I see,” said Poirot. He nodded thoughtfully. “Yes— I 
see.” 

“Why can’t Jackie take it like a man?” demanded Simon 
resentfully. 

A very faint smile twitched Poirot’s upper lip. 

“Well, you see, Monsieur Doyle, to begin with she is 
not a man.” 

“No, no— but I meant take it like a good sport! After 
all, you’ve got to take your medicine when it comes to you. 
The fault’s all mine, I admit. But there it is! If you no 
longer care for a girl, it’s simply madness to marry her. 
And, now that I see what Jackie’s really like and the 
lengths she is likely to go to, I feel I’ve had rather a lucky 


Death on the Nile 


77 


escape.” 

“The lengths she is likely to go to,” Poirot repeated 
thoughtfully. “Have you an idea, Monsieur Doyle, what 
those lengths are?” 

Simon looked at him, rather startled. 

“No— at least, what do you mean?” 

“You know she carries a pistol about with her.” 

Simon frowned, then shook his head. 

“I don’t believe she’ll use that— now. She might have 
done so earlier. But I believe it’s got past that. She’s just 
spiteful now— trying to take it out of us both.” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“It may be so,” he said doubtfully. 

“It’s Linnet I’m worrying about,” declared Simon, some- 
what unnecessarily. 

“I quite realize that,” said Poirot. 

“I’m not really afraid of Jackie doing any melodramatic 
shooting stuff, but this spying and following business has 
absolutely got Linnet on the raw. I’ll tell you the plan I’ve 
made, and perhaps you can suggest improvements on it. 
To begin with, I’ve announced fairly openly that we’re 
going to stay here ten days. But tomorrow the steamer 
Karnak starts from Shellal to Wadi Haifa. I propose to 
book passages on that under an assumed name. Tomorrow 
we’ll go on an excursion to Philae. Linnet’s maid can take 
the luggage. We’ll join the Karnak at Shellal. When 
Jackie finds we don’t come back, it will be too late— we 
shall be well on our way. She’ll assume we have given her 
the slip and gone back to Cairo. In fact I might even bribe 
the porter to say so. Inquiry at the tourist offices won’t 
help her, because our names won’t appear. How does that 
strike you?” 


78 Death on the Nile 

“It is well imagined, yes. And suppose she waits here 
till you return?” 

“We may not return. We could go on to Khartum and 
then perhaps by air to Kenya. She can’t follow us all over 
the globe.” 

“No; there must come a time when financial reasons 
forbid. She has very little money, I understand.” 

Simon looked at him with admiration. 

“That’s clever of you. Do you know, I hadn’t thought 
of that. Jackie’s as poor as they make them.” 

“And yet she has managed to follow you so far?” 

Simon said doubtfully: 

“She’s got a small income, of course. Something under 
two hundred a year, I imagine. I suppose— yes, I suppose 
she must have sold out the capital to do what she’s doing.” 

“So that the time will come when she has exhausted her 
resources and is quite penniless?” 

“Yes. ...” 

Simon wriggled uneasily. The thought seemed to make 
him uncomfortable. Poirot watched him attentively. 

“No,” he remarked. “No, it is not a pretty thought. . . .” 

Simon said rather angrily, “Well, / can’t help it!” Then 
he added, “What do you think of my plan?” 

“I think it may work, yes. But it is, of course, a retreat .” 

Simon flushed. 

“You mean, we’re running away? Yes, that’s true. . . . 
But Linnet—” 

Poirot watched him, then gave a short nod. 

“As you say, it may be the best way. But remember, 
Mademoiselle de Bellefort has brains.” 

Simon said sombrely: “Someday, I feel, we’ve got to 
make a stand and fight it out. Her attitude isn’t reasonable.” 


Death on the Nile 


79 


“Reasonable, mon Dieu /” cried Poirot. 

“There’s no reason why women shouldn’t behave like 
rational beings,” Simon asserted stolidly. 

Poirot said drily: “Quite frequently they do. That is 
even more upsetting!” He added: “I, too, shall be on the 
Karnak. It is part of my itinerary.” 

“Oh!” Simon hesitated, then said, choosing his words 
with some embarrassment: “That isn’t— isn’t— er— on our 
account in any way? I mean I wouldn’t like to think—” 

Poirot disabused him quickly. 

“Not at all. It was all arranged before I left London. I 
always make my plans well in advance.” 

“You don’t just move on from place to place as the 
fancy takes you? Isn’t the latter really pleasanter?” 

“Perhaps. But to succeed in life every detail should be 
arranged well beforehand.” 

Simon laughed and said, “That is how the more skilful 
murderer behaves, I suppose.” 

“Yes— though I must admit that the most brilliant crime 
I remember and one of the most difficult to solve was com- 
mitted on the spur of the moment.” 

Simon said boyishly, “You must tell us something about 
your cases on board the Karnak .” 

“No, no; that would be to talk— what do you call it— 
the shop.” 

“Yes, but your kind of shop is rather thrilling. Mrs. 
Allerton thinks so. She’s longing to get a chance to cross- 
question you.” 

“Mrs. Allerton? That is the charming grey-haired woman 
who has such a devoted son?” 

“Yes. She’ll be on the Karnak too.” 

“Does she know that you—?” 


8o 


Death on the Nile 


“Certainly not,” said Simon with emphasis. “Nobody 
knows. I’ve gone on the principle that it’s better not to 
trust anybody.” 

“An admirable sentiment— and one which I always 
adopt. By the way, the third member of your party, the 
tall grey-haired man—” 

“Pennington? ” 

“Yes. He is travelling with you?” 

Simon said grimly: “Not very usual on a honeymoon, 
you were thinking? Pennington is Linnet’s American 
trustee. We ran across him by chance in Cairo.” 

“Ah vraiment! You permit a question? She is of age, 
Madame your wife?” 

Simon looked amused. 

“She isn’t actually twenty-one yet— but she hadn’t got to 
ask anyone’s consent before marrying me. It was the great- 
est surprise to Pennington. He left New York on the 
Carmanic two days before Linnet’s letter got there telling 
him of our marriage, so he knew nothing about it.” 

“The Carmanic — ” murmured Poirot. 

“It was the greatest surprise to him when we ran into 
him at Shepheard’s in Cairo.” 

“That was indeed the coincidence!” 

“Yes, and we found that he was coming on this Nile 
trip— so naturally we foregathered; couldn’t have done 
anything else decently. Besides that, it’s been— well, a relief 
in some ways.” He looked embarrassed again. “You see 
Linnet’s been all strung up— expecting Jackie to turn up 
anywhere and everywhere. While we were alone together, 
the subject kept coming up. Andrew Pennington’s a help 
that way; we have to talk of outside matters.” 

“Your wife has not confided in Mr. Pennington?” 




Death on the Nile 


81 


“No.” Simon’s jaw looked aggressive. “It’s nothing to 
do with anyone else. Besides, when we started on this Nile 
trip we thought we’d seen the end of the business.” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“You have not seen the end of it yet. No— the end is not 
yet at hand. I am very sure of that.” 

“I say, Monsieur Poirot, you’re not very encouraging.” 

Poirot looked at him with a slight feeling of irritation. 
He thought to himself: “The Anglo Saxon, he takes noth- 
ing seriously but playing games! He does not grow up.” 

Linnet Doyle— Jacqueline de Bellefort— both of them 
took the business seriously enough. But in Simon’s attitude 
he could find nothing but male impatience and annoyance. 
He said: “You will permit me an impertinent question? 
Was it your idea to come to Egypt for your honeymoon?” 

Simon flushed. 

“No, of course not. As a matter of fact I’d rather have 
gone anywhere else, but Linnet was absolutely set upon 
it. And so— and so—” 

He stopped rather lamely. 

“Naturally,” said Poirot gravely. 

He appreciated the fact that, if Linnet Doyle was set 
upon anything, that thing had to happen. 

He thought to himself: “I have now heard three sepa- 
rate accounts of the affair— Linnet Doyle’s, Jacqueline de 
Bellefort’s, Simon Doyle’s. Which of them is nearest to 
the truth?” 


CHAPTER VI 



7S 

M 


Simon and Linnet Doyle set off on their expedition 
to Philae about eleven o’clock the following morning. 
Jacqueline de Belief ort, sitting on the hotel balcony, 
watched them set off in the picturesque sailing boat. What 
she did not see was the departure of a car— laden with 
luggage, and in which sat a demure-looking maid— from 
the front door of the hotel. It turned to the right in the 
direction of Shellal. 

Hercule Poirot decided to pass the remaining two hours 
before lunch on the island of Elephantine, immediately 
opposite the hotel. 

He went down to the landing stage. There were two 
men just stepping into one of the hotel boats, and Poirot 
joined them. The men were obviously strangers to each 
other. The younger of them had arrived by train the day 
before. He was a tall, dark-haired young man, with a thin 
face and a pugnacious chin. He was wearing an extremely 
dirty pair of grey flannel trousers and a high-necked polo 
jumper singularly unsuited to the climate. The other was a 
slightly podgy middle-aged man who lost no time in enter- 
ing into conversation with Poirot in idiomatic but slightly 
broken English. Far from taking part in the conversation, 
the younger man merely scowled at them both and then 
deliberately turned his back on them and proceeded to 
admire the agility with which the Nubian boatman steered 
the boat with his toes as he manipulated the sail with his 

82 


Death on the Nile 


83 


tnds. 

It was very peaceful on the water, the great smooth 
ippery black rocks gliding by and the soft breeze fanning 
leir faces. Elephantine was reached very quickly and on 
ling ashore Poirot and his loquacious acquaintance made 
raight for the Museum. By this time the latter had pro- 
iced a card which he handed to Poirot with a little bow. 
bore the inscription: 

Signor Guido Richetti, Archeologo. 

Not to be outdone, Poirot returned the bow and ex- 
acted his own card. These formalities completed, the two 
en stepped into the Museum together, the Italian pouring 
>rth a stream of erudite information. They were by now 
mversing in French. 

The young man in the flannel trousers strolled listlessly 
>und the Museum, yawning from time to time, and then 
caped to the outer air. 

Poirot and Signor Richetti at last followed him. The 
alian was energetic in examining the ruins, but presently 
lirot, espying a green-lined sunshade which he recog- 
zed on the rocks down by the river, escaped in that 
rection. 

Mrs. Allerton was sitting on a large rock, a sketch-book 
/ her side and a book on her lap. 

Poirot removed his hat politely and Mrs. Allerton at 
ice entered into conversation. 

“Good-morning,” she said. “I suppose it would be quite 
lpossible to get rid of some of these awful children.” 

A group of small black figures surrounded her, all 
•inning and posturing and holding out imploring hands 
they lisped “Bakshish” at intervals, hopefully. 

“I thought they’d get tired of me,” said Mrs. Allerton 


Death on the Nile 


84 

sadly. “They’ve been watching me for over two hours no^ 
—and they close in on me little by little; and then I ye 
‘Imshi’ and brandish my sunshade at them and they scatte, 
for a minute or two. And then they come back and star, 
and stare, and their eyes are simply disgusting, and so at 
their noses, and I don’t believe I really like children— nc 
unless they’re more or less washed and have the rudimem 
of manners.” 

She laughed ruefully. 

Poirot gallantly attempted to disperse the mob for he 
but without avail. They scattered and then reappearei 
closing in once more. 

“If there were only any peace in Egypt, I should like j 
better,” said Mrs. Allerton. “But you can never be alor, 
anywhere. Someone is always pestering you for money, c 
offering you donkeys, or beads, or expeditions to nativ 
villages, or duck shooting.” 

“It is the great disadvantage, that is true,” agreed Poiro 

He spread his handkerchief cautiously on the rock an 
sat somewhat gingerly upon it. 

“Your son is not with you this morning?” he went on. j 

“No, Tim had some letters to get off before we leav 
We’re doing the trip to the Second Cataract, you know 
1, too. 

“I’m so glad. I want to tell you that I’m quite thrilled 1 
meet you. When we were in Majorca, there was a Mi 
Leech there, and she was telling us the most wonderfl 
things about you. She’d lost a ruby ring bathing, and si 
was just lamenting that you weren’t there to find it fit 
her.” 

“Ah, par bleu, but I am not the diving seal!” 

They both laughed. ; 


Death on the Nile 


8 5 


Mrs. Allerton went on: 

“I saw you from my window walking down the drive 
nth Simon Doyle this morning. Do tell me what you make 
f him? We’re all so excited about him.” 

“Ah? Truly?” 

1 “Yes. You know his marriage to Linnet Ridgeway was 
ie greatest surprise. She was supposed to be going to 
larry Lord Windlesham and then suddenly she gets en- 
aged to this man no one had ever heard of! ” 

“You know her well, Madame?” 

“No, but a cousin of mine, Joanna Southwood, is one of 
er best friends.” 

: “Ah, yes, I have read that name in the papers.” He was 
lent a moment and then went on, “She is a young lady 
ery much in the news, Mademoiselle Joanna Southwood.” 
“Oh, she knows how to advertise herself all right,” 
lapped Mrs. Allerton. 

“You do not like her, Madame?” 

“That was a nasty remark of mine.” Mrs. Allerton looked 
enitent. “You see I’m old-fashioned. I don’t like her much, 
'im and she are the greatest friends, though.” 

“I see,” said Poirot. 

His companion shot a quick look at him. She changed 
le subject. 

“How very few young people there are out here! That 
retty girl with the chestnut hair and the appalling mother 
i the turban is almost the only young creature in the 
lace. You have talked to her a good deal, I notice. She 
iterests me, that child.” 

“Why is that, Madame?” 

“I feel sorry for her. You can suffer so much when you 
-e young and sensitive. I think she is suffering.” 


86 


Death on the Nile 


“Yes, she is not happy, poor little one.” 

“Tim and I call her the ‘sulky girl.’ I’ve tried to talk t< 
her once or twice, but she’s snubbed me on each occasion 
However I believe she’s going on this Nile trip too, and ! 
expect we’ll have to be more or less all matey together i 
shan’t we?” 

“It is a possible contingency, Madame.” 

“I’m very matey really— people interest me enormously 
All the different types.” She paused, then said: “Tim tellj! 
me that that dark girl— her name is de Belief ort— is the gii| 
who was engaged to Simon Doyle. It’s rather awkward fo ! 
them— meeting like this.” 

“It is awkward— yes,” agreed Poirot. 

Mrs. Allerton shot a quick glance at him. 

“You know, it may sound foolish, but she almost fright 
ened me. She looked so— intense.” if 

Poirot nodded his head slowly. 

“You were not far wrong, Madame. A great force o 
emotion is always frightening.” 

“Do people interest you too, Monsieur Poirot? Or d< 
you reserve your interest for potential criminals? ” 

“Madame— that category would not leave many peopli 
outside it.” 

Mrs. Allerton looked a trifle startled. 

“Do you really mean that?” < 

“Given the particular incentive, that is to say,” Poiro 
added. 

“Which would differ?” 

“Naturally.” 

Mrs. Allerton hesitated— a little smile on her lips. 

“Even I perhaps?” 

“Mothers, Madame, are particularly ruthless when thei I 




Death on the Nile 


87 


hildren are in danger.” 

She said gravely, “I think that’s true— yes, you’re quite 
ight.” 

She was silent a minute or two, then she said, smiling: 
I’m trying to imagine motives for crime suitable for every- 
ne in the hotel. It’s quite entertaining. Simon Doyle for 
istance?” 

Poirot said, smiling: “A very simple crime— a direct 
jiort-cut to his objective. No subtlety about it.” 

“And therefore very easily detected?” 

“Yes; he would not be ingenious.” 

“And Linnet?” 

“That would be like the Queen in your Alice in Won- 
derland, ‘Off with her head.’ ” 

“Of course. The divine right of monarchy! Just a little 
it of the Naboth’s vineyard touch. And the dangerous 
iirl— Jacqueline de Belief ort— could she do a murder?” 

Poirot hesitated for a minute or two, then he said doubt- 
llly, “Yes, I think she could.” 

“But you’re not sure?” 

“No. She puzzles me, that little one.” 

1 “I don’t think Mr. Pennington could do one, do you? 
[e looks so desiccated and dyspeptic— with no red blood 

him.” 

“But possibly a strong sense of self-preservation.” 

“Yes, I suppose so. And poor Mrs. Otterbourne in her 
;rban? ” 

“There is always vanity.” 

, “As a motive for murder?” Mrs. Allerton asked doubt- 
fly. 

“Motives for murder are sometimes very trivial, 
Ladame.” 


88 


Death on the Nile 


“What are the most usual motives, Monsieur Poirot?” 

“Most frequent— money. That is to say, gain in its vari| 
ous ramifications. Then there is revenge— and love, an 
fear, and pure hate, and beneficence—” 

“Monsieur Poirot!” 

“Oh, yes, Madame. I have known of— shall we say A?- 
being removed by B solely in order to benefit C. Politics 
murders often come under that heading. Someone is coni 
sidered to be harmful to civilization and is removed on thal 
account. Such people forget that life and death are thl 
affair of the good God.” 

He spoke gravely. 

Mrs. Allerton said quietly: “I am glad to hear you sa l 
that. All the same, God chooses his instruments.” 

“There is danger in thinking like that, Madame.” 

She adopted a lighter tone. 

“After this conversation, Monsieur Poirot, I shall won 
der that there is anyone left alive!” 

She got up. 

“We must be getting back. We have to start immedti 
ately after lunch.” 

When they reached the landing stage they found th| 
young man in the polo jumper just taking his place in thl 
boat. The Italian was already waiting. As the Nubian boai f 
man cast the sail loose and they started, Poirot addressed la 
polite remark to the stranger. 

“There are very wonderful things to be seen in Egypf 
are there not?” i 

The young man was now smoking a somewhat noisom 
pipe. He removed it from his mouth and remarked brief! ■ 
and very emphatically, in astonishingly well-bred accent| 
“They make me sick.” 




Death on the Nile 89 

Mrs. Allerton put on her pince-nez and surveyed him 
uth pleasurable interest. 

“Indeed? And why is that?” Poirot asked. 

“Take the Pyramids. Great blocks of useless masonry, 
it up to minister to the egoism of a despotic bloated king, 
hink of the sweated masses who toiled to build them and 
ced doing it. It makes me sick to think of the suffering 
id torture they represent.” 

Mrs. Allerton said cheerfully, “You’d rather have no 
inramids, no Parthenon, no beautiful tombs or temples— 
st the solid satisfaction of knowing that people got three 
;als a day and died in their beds.” 

The young man directed his scowl in her direction. 

“I think human beings matter more than stones.” 

“But they do not endure as well,” remarked Hercule 
birot. 

“I’d rather see a well fed worker than any so-called work 
art. What matters is the future— not the past.” 

This was too much for Signor Richetti, who burst into a 
rrent of impassioned speech not too easy to follow. 

The young man retorted by telling everybody exactly 
rat he thought of the capitalist system. He spoke with 
e utmost venom. 

When the tirade was over they had arrived at the hotel 
iding stage. 

Mrs. Allerton murmured cheerfully, “Well, well,” and 
:pped ashore. The young man directed a baleful glance 
:er her. 

In the hall of the hotel Poirot encountered Jacqueline de 
llefort. She was dressed in riding clothes. She gave him 
ironical little bow. 

“I’m going donkey riding. Do you recommend the na- 


J 


Death on the Nile 


90 

tive villages, Monsieur Poirot?” 

“Is that your excursion today. Mademoiselle? Eh bien 
they are picturesque— but do not spend large sums on na 
tive curioS.” 

“Which are shipped here from Europe? No, I am no 
so easy to deceive as that.” 

With a little nod she passed out into the brilliant sun 
shine. 

Poirot completed his packing— a very simple affair, sinct 
his possessions were always in the most meticulous order 
Then he repaired to the dining-room and ate an earh 
lunch. 

After lunch the hotel bus took the passengers for th 
Second Cataract to the station where they were to catcl 
the daily express from Cairo on to Shellal— a ten-minut 
run. 

The Allertons, Poirot, the young man in the dirty flan 
nel trousers and the Italian were the passengers. Mr: 
Otterbourne and her daughter had made the expedition t 
the Dam and to Philae and would join the steamer 3 1 
Shellal. 

The train from Cairo and Luxor was about twenty min • 
utes late. However, it arrived at last, and the usual scent 
of wild activity occurred. Native porters taking suitcase 
out of the train collided with other porters putting them ir 

Finally, somewhat breathless, Poirot found himself, wit 
an assortment of his own, the Allertons’ and some totall 
unknown luggage, in one compartment, while Tim an 
his mother were elsewhere with the remains of the assort?. 

: 

baggage. 

The compartment in which Poirot found himself \/;l 
occupied by an elderly lady with a very wrinkled face, j 


Death on the Nile 


9i 

stiff white stock, a good many diamonds and an expres- 
sion of reptilian contempt for the majority of mankind. 

She treated Poirot to an aristocratic glare and retired be- 
hind the pages of an American magazine. A big rather 
clumsy young woman of under thirty was sitting opposite 
her. She had eager brown eyes, rather like a dog’s, untidy 
hair, and a terrific air of willingness to please. At intervals 
the old lady looked over the top of her magazine and 
snapped an order at her. 

“Cornelia, collect the rugs.” “When we arrive look 
after my dressing-case. On no account let anyone else 
handle it.” “Don’t forget my paper-cutter.” 

The train run was brief. In ten minutes’ time they came 
to rest on the jetty where the S. S. Karnak was awaiting 
them. The Otterbournes were already on board. 

The Karnak was a smaller steamer than the Papyrus and 
the Lotus, the First Cataract steamers, which are too large 
to pass through the locks of the Assuan dam. The pas- 
sengers went on board and were shown their accommoda- 
tion. Since the boat was not full, most of the passengers 
had accommodation on the promenade deck. The entire 
forward part of this deck was occupied by an observation 
saloon, all glass-enclosed, where the passengers could sit 
and watch the river unfold before them. O11 the deck be- 
low were a smoking-room and a small drawing-room and 
on the deck below that, the dining-saloon. 

Having seen his possessions disposed in his cabin, Poirot 
came out on the deck again to watch the process of de- 
parture. He joined Rosalie Otterbourne, who was leaning 
over the side. 

“So now we journey into Nubia. You are pleased, 
Mademoiselle?” 


9 2 


Death on the Nile 


The girl drew a deep breadi. 

“Yes. I feel that one’s really getting away from things 
at last.” 

She made a gesture with her hand. There was a savage 
aspect about the sheet of water in front of them, the 
masses of rock without vegetation that came down to the 
water’s edge— here and there a trace of houses abandoned 
and ruined as a result of the damming up of the waters. 
The whole scene had a melancholy, almost sinister charm. 

“Away from people,” said Rosalie Otterbourne. 

“Except those of our own number, Mademoiselle?” 

She shrugged her shoulders. Then she said: “There’s 
something about this country that makes me feel— wicked. 
It brings to the surface all the things that are boiling in- 
side one. Everything’s so unfair— so unjust.” 

“I wonder. You cannot judge by material evidence.” 

Rosalie muttered: “Look at— at some people’s mothers— 
and look at mine. There is no God but Sex, and Salome 
Otterbourne is its Prophet.” She stopped. “I shouldn’t have 
said that, I suppose.” 

Poirot made a gesture with his hands. 

“Why not say it— to me? I am one of those who hear 
many things. If, as you say, you boil inside— like the jam— 
eh bien, let the scum come to the surface, and then one 
can take it off with a spoon, so.” 

He made the gesture of dropping something into the 
Nile. 

“There, it has gone.” 

“What an extraordinary man you are!” Rosalie said. 
Her sulky mouth twisted into a smile. Then she suddenly 
stiffened as she exclaimed: “Why, here are Mrs. Doyle and 
her husband! I’d no idea they were coming on this trip!” 


Death on the Nile 


93 


Linnet had just emerged from a cabin half way down 
the deck. Simon was behind her. Poirot was almost startled 
by the look of her— so radiant, so assured. She looked posi- 
tively arrogant with happiness. Simon Doyle, too, was a 
transformed being. He was grinning from ear to ear and 
looking like a happy schoolboy. 

“This is grand,” he said as he too leaned on the rail. 
“I’m really looking forward to this trip, aren’t you, Lin- 
net? It feels somehow, so much less touristy— as though we 
were really going into the heart of Egypt.” 

His wife responded quickly: “I know. It’s so much- 
wilder, somehow.” 

Her hand slipped through his arm. He pressed it close 
to his side. 

“We’re off, Lin,” he murmured. 

The steamer was drawing away from the jetty. They 
had started on their seven-day journey to the Second 
Cataract and back. 

Behind them a light silvery laugh rang out. Linnet 
whipped round. 

Jacqueline de Bellefort was standing there. She seemed 
amused. 

“Hullo, Linnet! I didn’t expect to find you here. I 
thought you said you were staying at Assuan another ten 
days. This is a surprise!” 

“You— you didn’t—” Linnet’s tongue stammered. She 
forced a ghastly conventional smile. “I— I didn’t expect to 
see you either.” 

“No?” 

Jacqueline moved away to the other side of the boat. 
Linnet’s grasp on her husband’s arm tightened. 

“Simon— Simon— ” 


94 


Death on the Nile 


All Doyle’s good-natured pleasure had gone. He looked 
furious. His hands clenched themselves in spite of his effort 
at self-control. 

The two of them moved a little away. Without turning 
his head Poirot caught scraps of disjointed words: 

. . turn back . . . impossible ... we could . . .” 
and then, slightly louder, Doyle’s voice, despairing but 
grim: “We can’t run away for ever, Lin. We’ve got to go 
through with it now. . . 

It was some hours later. Daylight was just fading. Poirot 
stood in the glass-enclosed saloon looking straight ahead. 
The Karnak was going through a narrow gorge. The rocks 
came down with a kind of sheer ferocity to the river flow- 
ing deep and swift between them. They were in Nubia 
now. 

He heard a movement and Linnet Doyle stood by his 
side. Her fingers twisted and untwisted themselves; she 
looked as he had never yet seen her look. There was about 
her the air of a bewildered child. She said: 

“Monsieur Poirot, I’m afraid— I’m afraid of everything. 
I’ve never felt like this before. All these wild rocks and 
the awful grimness and starkness. Where are we going? 
What’s going to happen? I’m afraid, I tell you. Everyone 
hates me. I’ve never felt like that before. I’ve always been 
nice to people— I’ve done things for them— and they hate 
me— lots of people hate me. Except for Simon, I’m sur- 
rounded by enemies. . . . It’s terrible to feel— that there 
are people who hate you. . . .” 

“But what is all this, Madame?” 

She shook her head. 

“I suppose— it’s nerves. ... I just feel that— everything’s 
unsafe all round me.” 


Death on the Nile 


95 


She cast a quick nervous glance over her shoulder. Then 
she said abruptly: “How will all this end? We’re caught 
here. Trapped! There’s no way out. We’ve got to go on. 
I— I don’t know where I am.” 

She slipped down onto a seat. Poirot looked down on her 
gravely; his glance was not untinged with compassion. 

“How did she know we were coming on this boat? ” she 
said. “How could she have known?” 

Poirot shook his head as he answered, “She has brains, 
you know.” 

“I feel as though I shall never escape from her.” 

Poirot said: “There is one plan you might have adopted. 
In fact I am surprised that it did not occur to you. After 
all, with you, Madame, money is no object. Why did you 
not engage your own private dahabiyeh?” 

Linnet shook her head rather helplessly. 

“If we’d known about all this— but you see we didn’t— 
then. And it was difficult. . . .” She flashed out with sud- 
den impatience: “Oh! you don’t understand half my diffi- 
culties. I’ve got to be careful with Simon. . . . He’s— he’s 
absurdly sensitive— about money. About my having so 
much! He wanted me to go to some little place in Spain 
with him— he— he wanted to pay all our honeymoon ex- 
penses himself. As if it mattered! Men are stupid! He’s got 
to get used to— to— living comfortably. The mere idea of a 
dahabiyeh upset him— the— the needless expense. I’ve got to 
educate him— gradually.” 

She looked up, bit her lip vexedly, as though feeling that 
she had been led into discussing her difficulties rather too 
unguardedly. 

She got up. 

“I must change. I’m sorry, Monsieur Poirot. I’m afraid 
I’ve been talking a lot of foolish nonsense.” 


CHAPTER VII 


Mrs. Allerton, looking quiet and distinguished in her 
simple black lace evening gown, descended two decks to 
the dining-room. At the door of it her son caught her 
up. 

“Sorry, darling. I thought I was going to be late.” 

“I wonder where we sit.” The saloon was dotted with 
little tables. Mrs. Allerton paused till the steward, who was 
busy seating a party of people, could attend to them. 

“By the way,” she added, “I asked little Hercule Poirot 
to sit at our table.” 

“Mother, you didn’t!” Tim sounded 
and annoyed. 

His mother stared at him in surprise. Tim was usually 
so easy-going. 

“My dear, do you mind?” 

“Yes, I do. He’s an unmitigated little bounder!” 

“Oh, no, Tim! I don’t agree with you.” 

“Anyway, what do we want to get mixed up with an 
outsider for? Cooped up like this on a small boat, that sort 
of thing is always a bore. He’ll be with us morning, noon 
and night.” 

“I’m sorry, dear.” Mrs. Allerton looked distressed. “I 
thought really it would amuse you. After all, he must have 
had a varied experience. And you love detective stories.” 

Tim grunted. 

“I wish you wouldn’t have these bright ideas, Mother. 

96 


really taken aback 


Death on the Nile 


97 


We can’t get out of it now, I suppose?” 

“Really, Tim, I don’t see how we can.” 

“Oh, well, we shall have to put up with it, I suppose.” 

The steward came to them at this minute and led them 
to a table. Mrs. Allerton’s face wore rather a puzzled ex- 
pression as she followed him. Tim was usually so easy- 
going and good-tempered. This outburst was quite unlike 
him. It wasn’t as though he had the ordinary Britisher’s 
dislike— and mistrust— of foreigners. Tim was very cos- 
mopolitan. Oh, well— she sighed. Men were incomprehen- 
sible! Even one’s nearest and dearest had unsuspected re- 
actions and feelings. 

As they took their places, Hercule Poirot came quickly 
and silently into the dining-saloon. He paused with his 
hand on the back of the third chair. 

“You really permit, Madame, that I avail myself of your 
kind suggestion?” 

“Of course. Sit down, Monsieur Poirot.” 

“You are most amiable.” 

She was uneasily conscious that, as he seated himself, 
he shot a swift glance at Tim, and that Tim had not quite 
succeeded in masking a somewhat sullen expression. 

Mrs. Allerton set herself to produce a pleasant atmos- 
phere. As they drank their soup, she picked up the pas- 
senger list which had been placed beside her plate. 

“Let’s try and identify everybody,” she suggested cheer- 
fully. “I always think that’s rather fun.” 

She began reading: “Mrs. Allerton, Mr. T. Allerton. 
That’s easy enough! Miss de Belief ort. They’ve put her 
at the same table as the Otterbournes, I see. I wonder what 
she and Rosalie will make of each other. Who comes next? 
Dr. Bessner. Dr. Bessner? Who can identify Dr. Bessner?” 


98 Death on the Nile 

She bent her glance on a table at which four men sat 
together. 

“I think he must be the fat one with the closely shaved 
head and the moustache. A German, I should imagine. He 
seems to be enjoying his soup very much.” Certain succu- 
lent noises floated across to them. 

Mrs. Allerton continued: “Miss Bowers? Can we make 
a guess at Miss Bowers? There are three or four women— 
No, we’ll leave her for the present. Mr. and Mrs. Doyle. 
Yes, indeed, the lions of this trip. She really is very beau- 
tiful, and what a perfectly lovely frock she is wearing.” 

Tim turned round in his chair. Linnet and her husband 
and Andrew Pennington had been given a table in the cor- 
ner. Linnet was wearing a white dress and pearls. 

“It looks frightfully simple to me,” said Tim. “Just a 
length of stuff with a kind of cord round the middle.” 

“Yes, darling,” said his mother. “A very nice manly de- 
scription of an eighty-guinea model.” 

“I can’t think why women pay so much for their 
clothes,” Tim said. “It seems absurd to me.” 

Mrs. Allerton proceeded with her study of her fellow 
passengers. 

“Mr. Fanthorp must be one of the four at that table. The 
intensely quiet young man who never speaks. Rather a nice 
face, cautious but intelligent.” 

Poirot agreed. 

“He is intelligent— yes. He does not talk, but he listens 
very attentively, and he also watches. Yes, he makes good 
use of his eyes. Not quite the type you would expect to 
find travelling for pleasure in this part of the world. I won- 
der what he is doing here.” 

“Mr. Ferguson,” read Mrs. Allerton. “I feel that Fergu- 


Death on the Nile 


99 


on must be our anti-capitalist friend. Mrs. Otterbourne, 
diss Otterbourne. We know all about them. Mr. Pen- 
lington? Alias Uncle Andrew. He’s a good-looking man, 
think-” 

“Now, Mother,” said Tim. 

“I think he’s very good-looking in a dry sort of way,” 
aid Mrs. Allerton. “Rather a ruthless jaw. Probably the 
:ind of man one reads about in the paper, who operates 
•n Wall Street— or is it in Wall Street? I’m sure he must 
ie extremely rich. Next— Monsieur Hercule Poirot— whose 
alents are really being wasted. Can’t you get up a crime 
or Monsieur Poirot, Tim?” 

But her well-meant banter only seemed to annoy her 
pn anew. He scowled and Mrs. Allerton hurried on: “Mr. 
lichetti. Our Italian archaeological friend. Then Miss 
Lobson and last of all Miss Van Schuyler. The last’s easy, 
"he very ugly old American lady who obviously feels 
erself the queen of the boat and who is clearly going to 
e very exclusive and speak to nobody who doesn’t come 
p to the most exacting standards! She’s rather marvellous, 
;n’t she, really? A kind of period piece. The two women 
/ith her must be Miss Bowers and Miss Robson— perhaps 
secretary, the thin one with pince-nez, and a poor rela- 
on, the rather pathetic young woman who is obviously 
a joying herself in spite of being treated like a black slave, 
think Robson’s the secretary woman and Bowers is the 
oor relation.” 

“Wrong, Mother,” said Tim, grinning. He had suddenly 
^covered his good humour. 

“How do you know?” 

“Because I was in the lounge before dinner and the old 
ean said to the companion woman: ‘Where’s Miss Bow- 


100 


Death on the Nile 


ers? Fetch her at once, Cornelia.’ And away trotted Cor- 
nelia like an obedient dog.” 

“I shall have to talk to Miss Van Schuyler,” mused Mrs, 
Allerton. 

Tim grinned again. 

“She’ll snub you, Mother.” 

“Not at all. I shall pave the way by sitting near her and 
conversing, in low (but penetrating), well-bred tones, 
about any titled relations and friends I can remember, li 
think a casual mention of your second cousin, once re- 
moved, the Duke of Glasgow, would probably do the 
trick.” 

“How unscrupulous you are, Mother!” 

Events after dinner were not without their amusing side 
to a student of human nature. 

The socialistic young man (who turned out to be Mr 
Ferguson as deduced) retired to the smoking-room, scorn- 
ing the assemblage of passengers in the observation saloorli 
on the top deck. i 

Miss Van Schuyler duly secured the best and most un- » 
draughty position there by advancing firmly on a table ai I 
which Mrs. Otterbourne was sitting and saying, “You’l l 
excuse me, I am sure, but I think my knitting was lefi 
here!” 

Fixed by a hypnotic eye, the turban rose and gavn 
ground. Miss Van Schuyler established herself and heni 
suite. Mrs. Otterbourne sat down near by and hazardec 
various remarks, which were met with such chilling po 
liteness that she soon gave up. Miss Van Schuyler then sa 
in glorious isolation. The Doyles sat with the Allertons 
Dr. Bessner retained the quiet Mr. Fanthorp as a compan 
ion. Jacqueline de Belief ort sat by herself with a book ! 


Death on the Nile 


IOI 


{.osalie Otterbourne was restless. Mrs. Allerton spoke to 
er once or twice and tried to draw her into their group, 
ut the girl responded ungraciously. 

M. Hercule Poirot spent his evening listening to an ac- 
ount of Mrs. Otterbourne’s mission as a writer. 

On his way to his cabin that night he encountered Jac- 
ueline de Bellefort. She was leaning over the rail and, as 
le turned her head, he was struck by the look of acute 
lisery on her face. There was now no insouciance, no 
lalicious defiance, no dark flaming triumph. 

“Good-night, Adademoiselle.” 

“Good-night, Monsieur Poirot.” She hesitated, then said v 
You were surprised to find me here?” 

“I was not so much surprised as sorry— very sorry. . . 

He spoke gravely. 

“You mean sorry— for me?” 

“That is what I meant. You have chosen, Mademoiselle, 
le dangerous course. ... As we here in this boat have 
nbarked on a journey, so you too have embarked on your 
wn private journey— a journey on a swift-moving river, 
etween dangerous rocks, and heading for who knows 
Tat currents of disaster. . . .” 

“Why do you say all this?” 

“Because it is true. ... You have cut the bonds that 
loored you to safety. I doubt now if you could turn back 

you would.” 

She said very slowly, “That is true. . . .” 

Then she flung her head back. 

“Ah, well— one must follow one’s star, wherever it leads.” 

“Beware, Mademoiselle, that it is not a false star. . . .” 

She laughed and mimicked the parrot cry of the donkey 
bys: 


102 


Death on the Nile 


“That very bad star, sir! That star fall down. . . 

He was just dropping off to sleep when the murmur of 
voices awoke him. It was Simon Doyle’s voice he heard, 
repeating the same words he had used when the steamer 
left Shellal. 

“We’ve got to go through with it now. . . 

“Yes,” thought Hercule Poirot to himself, “we have got 
to go through with it now. . . 

He was not happy. 


CHAPTER VIII 


'he steamer arrived early next morning at Ez-Sebua. 

Cornelia Robson, her face beaming, a large flapping hat 
n her head, was one of the first to hurry on shore. Cor- 
elia was not good at snubbing people. She was of an 
miable disposition and disposed to like all her fellow crea- 
ires. 

The sight of Hercule Poirot, in a white suit, pink shirt, 
trge black bow tie and a white topee, did not make her 
/ince as the aristocratic Miss Van Schuyler would as- 
aredly have winced. As they walked together up an ave- 
ue of sphinxes, she responded readily to his conventional 
pening. 

“Your companions are not coming ashore to view the 
jmple?” 

“Well, you see, Cousin Marie— that’s Miss Van Schuy- 
ir— never gets up very early. She has to be very, very 
areful of her health. And of course she wanted Miss Bow- 
rs, that’s her hospital nurse, to do things for her. And she 
lid, too, that this isn’t one of the best temples— but she 
/as frightfully kind and said it would be quite all right 
ir me to come.” 

“That was very gracious of her,” said Poirot drily. 

The ingenuous Cornelia agreed unsuspectingly. 

“Oh, she’s very kind. It’s simply wonderful of her to 
ring me on this trip. I do feel I’m a lucky girl. I just could 
ardly believe it when she suggested to Mother that I 

103 


Death on the Nile 


104 


should come too.” 

“And you have enjoyed it— yes?” 

“Oh, it’s been wonderful! I’ve seen Italy— Venice anc 
Padua and Pisa— and then Cairo— only Cousin Marie wasnV 
very well in Cairo, so I couldn’t get around much, anc 
now this wonderful trip up to Wadi Haifa and back.” 

Poirot said, smiling, “You have the happy nature, Made 
moiselle.” 

He looked thoughtfully from her to the silent, frown- 
ing Rosalie, who was walking ahead by herself. 

“She’s very nice-looking, isn’t she?” said Cornelia, fol^ 
lowing his glance. “Only kind of scornful looking. She’ ^ 
very English, of course. She’s not as lovely as Mrs. Doyle 
I think Mrs. Doyle’s the loveliest, the most elegant womai 11 
I’ve ever seen! And her husband just worships the ground 
she walks on, doesn’t he? I think that grey-haired lady i;| 
kind of distinguished looking, don’t you? She’s cousin td 
a Duke, I believe. She was talking about him right nea' c 
us last night. But she isn’t actually titled herself, is she? : 

She prattled on until the dragoman in charge called ” 
halt and began to intone: “This temple was dedicated tjl 
Egyptian God Amun and the Sun God Re-Harakhte- 
whose symbol was hawk’s head . . .” >c 

It droned on. Dr. Bessner, Baedeker in hand, mumbled 
to himself in German. He preferred the written word. c 

Tim Allerton had not joined the party. His mother ws* 3 
breaking the ice with the reserved Mr. Fanthorp. Andre\ SI 
Pennington, his arm through Linnet Doyle’s, was listen^ 
ing attentively, seemingly most interested in the measure" 
ments as recited by the guide. 

“Sixty-five feet high, is that so? Looks a little less to mi 1 ” 
Great fellow, this Rameses. An Egyptian live wire.” 


Death on the Nile 


io 5 


“A big business man, Uncle Andrew.” 

Andrew Pennington looked at her appreciatively. 

“You look fine this morning, Linnet. I’ve been a mite 
jrorried about you lately. You’ve looked kind of peaky.” 

Chatting together, the party returned to the boat. Once 
nore the Karnak glided up the river. The scenery was less 
jern now. There were palms, cultivation. 

It was as though the change in the scenery had relieved 
i>me secret oppression that had brooded over the passen- 
jrs. Tim Allerton had got over his fit of moodiness, 
osalie looked less sulky. Linnet seemed almost light- 
ened. 

Pennington said to her, “It’s tactless to talk business to 
{bride on her honeymoon, but there are just one or two 
tings-” 

, “Why, of course, Uncle Andrew.” Linnet at once be- 
( me businesslike. “My marriage has made a difference, of 
nurse.” 

t “That’s just it. Some time or other I want your signa- 
Ire to several documents.” 

, “Why not now?” 

Andrew Pennington glanced round. Their corner of the 
nservation saloon was quite untenanted. Most of the peo- 
je were outside on the deck space between the observa- 
[m saloon and the cabins. The only occupants of the 
floon were Mr. Ferguson— who was drinking beer at a 
giall table in the middle, his legs, encased in their dirty 
Innel trousers, stuck out in front of him, whilst he 
faistled to himself in the intervals of drinking— M. Her- 
ele Poirot, who was sitting close up to the front glass, 
{rent on the panorama unfolding before him, and Miss 
*in Schuyler, who was sitting in a corner reading a book 


io6 


Death on the Nile 


on Egypt. 

“That’s fine,” said Andrew Pennington. He left th< 
saloon. 

Linnet and Simon smiled at each other— a slow smile thai 
took a few minutes to come to full fruition. 

“All right, sweet?” he asked. 

“Yes, still all right. . . . Funny how I’m not rattled anj 
more.” 

Simon said with deep conviction in his tone, “You’r< 
marvellous.” 

Pennington came back. He brought with him a sheaf o 
closely written documents. 

“Mercy!” cried Linnet. “Have I got to sign all these?’ 

Andrew Pennington was apologetic. 

“It’s tough on you, I know, but I’d just like to get you: 
affairs put in proper shape. First of all there’s the lease o 
the Fifth Avenue property . . . then there are the West 
ern Lands Concessions . . .” 

He talked on, rustling and sorting the papers. Simoi 
yawned. 

The door to the deck swung open and Mr. Fanthorj 
came in. He gazed aimlessly round, then strolled forwari 
and stood by Poirot looking out at the pale blue wate 
and the yellow enveloping sands. . . . 

“—you sign just there,” concluded Pennington, spreadin; 
a paper before Linnet and indicating a space. 

Linnet picked up the document and glanced through ii 
She turned back once to the first page, then, taking up th 
fountain pen Pennington had laid beside her, she signet 
her name Linnet Doyle. . . . 

Pennington took away the paper and spread out anothei j 

Fanthorp wandered over in their direction. He peered j 


Death on the Nile 


107 


out through the side window at something that seemed to 
interest him on the bank they were passing. 

“That’s just the transfer,” said Pennington. “You needn’t 
read it.” 

But Linnet took a brief glance through it. Pennington 
laid down a third paper. Again Linnet perused it care- 
fully. 

“They’re all quite straightforward,” said Andrew. 
“Nothing of interest. Only legal phraseology.” 

Simon yawned again. 

“My dear girl, you’re not going to read the whole lot 
through, are you? You’ll be at it till lunch time and 
longer.” 

“I always read everything through,” said Linnet. “Father 
taught me to do that. He said there might be some clerical 
error.” 

Pennington laughed rather harshly. 

“You’re a grand woman of business, Linnet.” 

“She’s much more conscientious than I’d be,” said Simon, 
1 laughing. “I’ve never read a legal document in my life. I 
sign where they tell me to sign on the dotted line— and 
that’s that.” 

That’s frightfully slipshod,” said Linnet disapprovingly. 
I’ve no business head,” declared Simon cheerfully. 
Never had. A fellow tells me to sign— I sign. It’s much 
the simplest way.” 

Andrew Pennington was looking at him thoughtfully. 
He said drily, stroking his upper lip, “A little risky some- 
times, Doyle?” 

Nonsense,” replied Simon. “I’m not one of those peo- 
ple who believe the whole world is out to do one down, 
.’m a trusting kind of fellow— and it pays, you know. I’ve 


“ 


io8 


Death on the Nile 


hardly ever been let down.” 

Suddenly, to everyone’s surprise, the silent Mr. Fan- 
thorp swung round and addressed Linnet. 

“I hope I’m not butting in, but you must let me say 
how much I admire your businesslike capacity. In my pro- 
fession— er— I am a lawyer— I find ladies sadly unbusiness- 
like. Never to sign a document before you read it through 
is admirable— altogether admirable.” 

He gave a little bow. Then, rather red in the face, he 
turned once more to contemplate the banks of the Nile. 

Linnet said rather uncertainly, “Er— thank you. . . .” 
She bit her lip to repress a giggle. The young man had 
looked so preternaturally solemn. 

Andrew Pennington looked seriously annoyed. 

Simon Doyle looked uncertain whether to be annoyed 
or amused. 

The backs of Mr. Fanthorp’s ears were bright crimson. 

“Next, please,” said Linnet, smiling up at Pennington. 

But Pennington was looking decidedly ruffled. 

“I think perhaps some other time would be better,” he 
said stiffly. “As— er— Doyle says, if you have to read 
through all these we shall be here till lunch time. We 
mustn’t miss enjoying the scenery. Anyway those first two 
papers were the only urgent ones. We’ll settle down to 
business later.” 

“It’s frightfully hot in here,” Linnet said. “Let’s go out- 
side.” 

The three of them passed through the swing door. Her- 
cule Poirot turned his head. His gaze rested thoughtfully 
on Mr. Fanthorp’s back; then it shifted to the lounging 
figure of Mr. Ferguson who had his head thrown back 
and was still whistling softly to himself. 


Death on the Nile 


109 


Finally Poirot looked over at the upright figure of Miss 
Van Schuyler in her corner. Miss Van Schuyler was glar- 
ing at Mr. Ferguson. 

The swing door on the port side opened and Cornelia 
Robson hurried in. 

“You’ve been a long time,” snapped the old lady. 
“Where’ve you been?” 

‘Tm so sorry, Cousin Marie. The wool wasn’t where 
you said it was. It was in another case altogether—” 

“My dear child, you are perfectly hopeless at finding 
anything! You are willing, I know, my dear, but you must 
try to be a little cleverer and quicker. It only needs con- 
centration.” 

“I’m so sorry, Cousin Marie. I’m afraid I am very stupid.” 

“Nobody need be stupid if they try, my dear. I have 
brought you on this trip, and I expect a little attention in 
return.” 

Cornelia flushed. 

“I’m very sorry. Cousin Marie.” 

“And where is Miss Bowers? It was time for my drops 
ten minutes ago. Please go and find her at once. The doc- 
tor said it was most important—” 

But at this stage Miss Bowers entered, carrying a small 
medicine glass. 

“Your drops, Miss Van Schuyler.” 

“I should have had them at eleven,” snapped the old 
lady. “If there’s one thing I detest it’s unpunctuality.” 

“Quite,” said Miss Bowers. She glanced at her wrist- 
watch. “It’s exactly half a minute to eleven.” 

“By my watch it’s ten past.” 

“I think you’ll find my watch is right. It’s a perfect time- 
keeper. It never loses or gains.” Miss Bowers was quite un- 


I 10 


Death on the Nile 


perturbable. 

Miss Van Schuyler swallowed the contents of the medi- 
cine glass. 

“I feel definitely worse,” she snapped. 

“I’m sorry to hear that, Miss Van Schuyler.” 

Miss Bowers did not sound sorry. She sounded com- 
pletely uninterested. She was obviously making the correct 
reply mechanically. 

“It’s too hot in here,” snapped Miss Van Schuyler. “Find 
me a chair on the deck, Miss Bowers. Cornelia, bring my 
knitting. Don’t be clumsy or drop it. And then I shall want 
you to wind some wool.” 

The procession passed out. 

Mr. Ferguson sighed, stirred his legs and remarked to 
the world at large, “Gosh, I’d like to scrag that dame.” 

Poirot asked interestedly, “She is a type you dislike, eh?” 

“Dislike? I should say so. What good has that woman i, 
ever been to anyone or anything? She’s never worked or 
lifted a finger. She’s just battened on other people. She’s 
a parasite— and a damned unpleasant parasite. There are a 
lot of people on this boat I’d say the world could do with- 
out.” 

“Really?” 

“Yes. That girl in here just now, signing share transfers 
and throwing her weight about. Hundreds and thousands 
of wretched workers slaving for a mere pittance to keep 
her in silk stockings and useless luxuries. One of the rich- 
est women in England, so someone told me— and never 
done a hand’s turn in her life.” 

“Who told you she was one of the richest women in 
England?” 

Mr. Ferguson cast a belligerent eye at him. 


Death on the Nile 


1 1 1 


“A man you wouldn’t be seen speaking to! A man who 
works with his hands and isn’t ashamed of it! Not one of 
your dressed-up, foppish good-for-nothings.” 

His eye rested unfavourably on the bow tie and pink 
shirt. 

“Me, I work with my brains and am not ashamed of 
it,” said Poirot, answering the glance. 

Mr. Ferguson merely snorted. 

“Ought to be shot up— the lot of them!” he asserted. 

“My dear young man,” said Poirot, “what a passion 
you have for violence!” 

“Can you tell me of any good that can be done with- 
out it? You’ve got to break down and destroy before you 
can build up.” 

“It is certainly much easier and much noisier and much 
more spectacular.” 

“What do you do for a living? Nothing at all, I bet. 
Probably call yourself a middle man.” 

“I am not a middle man. I am a top man,” declared Her- 
cule Poirot with slight arrogance. 

“What are you?” 

“I am a detective,” said Hercule Poirot with the modest 
air of one who says “I am a King.” 

“Good God!” The young man seemed seriously taken 
aback. “Do you mean that girl actually totes about a dumb 
dick? Is she as careful of her precious skin as that?” 

“I have no connection whatever with Monsieur and 
Madame Doyle,” said Poirot stiffly. “I am on a holiday.” 
“Enjoying a vacation— eh?” 

“And you? Is it not that you are on a holiday also?” 
“Holiday!” Mr. Ferguson snorted. Then he added 


I 12 


Death on the Nile 


cryptically, “I’m studying conditions.” 

“Very interesting,” murmured Poirot and moved gently 
out onto the deck. 

Miss Van Schuyler was established in the best corner. 
Cornelia knelt in front of her, her arms outstretched with 
a skein of grey wool upon them. Miss Bowers was sitting 
very upright reading the Saturday Evening Post. 

Poirot wandered gently onward down the starboard 
deck. As he passed round the stern of the boat he almost 
ran into a woman who turned a startled face toward him 
—a dark, piquant, Latin face. She was neatly dressed in 
black and had been standing talking to a big burly man 
in uniform— one of the engineers, by the look of him. 
There was a queer expression on both their faces— guilt 
and alarm. Poirot wondered what they had been talking 
about. 

He rounded the stern and continued his walk along the 
port side. A cabin door opened and Mrs. Otterbourne 
emerged and nearly fell into his arms. She was wearing a 
scarlet satin dressing-gown. 

“So sorry,” she apologized. “Dear Mr. Poirot— so very 
sorry. The motion— just the motion, you know. Never did 
have any sea legs. If the boat would only keep still . . .” 
She clutched at his arm. “It’s the pitching I can’t stand. 
. . . Never really happy at sea. . . . And left all alone 
here hour after hour. That girl of mine— no sympathy— no 
understanding of her poor old mother who’s done every- 
thing for her. . . .” Mrs. Otterbourne began to weep. 
“Slaved for her I have— worn myself to the bone— to the 
bone. A grande amour euse— that’s what I might have been 
—a grande amoureuse — sacrificed everything— everything. 




Death on the Nile 


113 

. . . And nobody cares! But I’ll tell everyone— I’ll tell 
them now— how she neglects me— how hard she is— making 
me come on this journey— bored to death. . . . I’ll go and 
tell them now—” 

She surged forward. Poirot gently repressed the action. 

“I will send her to you, Madame. Re-enter your cabin. 
It is best that way—” 

“No. I want to tell everyone— everyone on the boat—” 

“It is too dangerous, Madame. The sea is too rough. You 
might be swept overboard.” 

Mrs. Otterbourne looked at him doubtfully. 

“You think so. You really think so?” 

“I do.” 

He was successful. Mrs. Otterbourne wavered, faltered 
and re-entered her cabin. 

Poirot’s nostrils twitched once or twice. Then he nod- 
ded and walked on to where Rosalie Otterbourne was sit- 
ting between Mrs. Allerton and Tim. 

“Your mother wants you, Mademoiselle.” 

She had been laughing quite happily. Now her face 
clouded over. She shot a quick suspicious look at him and 
hurried along the deck. 

“I can’t make that child out,” said Mrs. Allerton. “She 
varies so. One day she’s friendly; the next day she’s posi- 
tively rude.” 

“Thoroughly spoilt and bad-tempered,” said Tim. 

Mrs. Allerton shook her head. 

“No. I don’t think it’s that. I think she’s unhappy.” 

Tim shrugged his shoulders. 

“Oh, well, I suppose we’ve all got our private troubles.” 
His voice sounded hard and curt. 

A booming noise was heard. 


1 14 Death on the Nile 

“Lunch,” cried Mrs. Allerton delightedly. “I’m starv- 
ing.” 

That evening, Poirot noticed that Mrs. Allerton was sit- 
ting talking to Miss Van Schuyler. As he passed, Mrs. Al- 
lerton closed one eye and opened it again. She was saying, 
“Of course at Calfries Castle— the dear Duke—” 

Cornelia, released from attendance, was out on the deck. 
She was listening to Dr. Bessner, who was instructing her 
somewhat ponderously in Egyptology as culled from the 
pages of Baedeker. Cornelia listened with rapt attention. 

Leaning over the rail Tim Allerton was saying, “Any- 
how, it’s a rotten world. . . .” 

Rosalie Otterbourne answered, “It’s unfair; some people 
have everything.” 

Poirot sighed. He was glad that he was no longer young. 


CHAPTER IX 


)n the Monday morning various expressions of de- 
ght and appreciation were heard on the deck of the Kar- 
ak. The steamer was moored to the bank and a few hun- 
red yards away, the morning sun just striking it, was a 
reat temple carved out of the face of the rock. Four colos- 
il figures, hewn out of the cliff, look out eternally over 
le Nile and face the rising sun. 

Cornelia Robson said incoherently: “Oh, Monsieur Poi- 
at, isn’t it wonderful? I mean they’re so big and so peace- 
il— and looking at them makes one feel that one’s so 
nail and— and rather like an insect— and that nothing mat- 
jrs very much really, does it?” 

Mr. Fanthorp, who was standing near by, murmured, 
Very— er— impressive.” 

“Grand, isn’t it?” said Simon Doyle, strolling up. He 
/ent on confidentially to Poirot: “You know, I’m not 
luch of a fellow for temples and sight-seeing and all that, 
ut a place like this sort of gets you, if you know what 
mean. Those old Pharaohs must have been wonderful 
ellows.” 

The others had drifted away. Simon lowered his voice. 
“I’m no end glad we came on this trip. It’s— well, it’s 
leared things up. Amazing why it should— but there it is. 
annet’s got her nerve back. She says it’s because she’s ac- 
ually faced the business at last.” 

“I think that is very probable,” said Poirot. 

ns 


Death on the Nile 


ii 6 

“She says that when she actually saw Jackie on the boa 
she felt terrible— and then, suddenly, it didn’t matter anj 
more. We’re both agreed that we won’t try and dodge he 
any more. We’ll just meet her on her own ground am 
show her that this ridiculous stunt of hers doesn’t worr] 
us a bit. It’s just damned bad form— that’s all. She though 
she’d got us badly rattled, but now, well, we just aren’ 
rattled any more. That ought to show her.” 

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully. 

“So that’s splendid, isn’t it?” 

“Oh, yes, yes.” 

Linnet came along the deck. She was dressed in a sof 
shade of apricot linen. She was smiling. She greeted Poiro 
with no particular enthusiasm, just gave him a cool noc 
and then drew her husband away. 

Poirot realized with a momentary flicker of amusemen 
that he had not made himself popular by his critical atti 
tude. Linnet was used to unqualified admiration of all shr 
was or did. Hercule Poirot had sinned noticeably agains 
this creed. 

Mrs. Allerton, joining him, murmured: 

“What a difference in that girl! She looked worried anc 
not very happy at Assuan. Today she looks so happy tha 
one might almost be afraid she was fey.” 

Before Poirot could respond as he meant, the party wa: 
called to order. The official dragoman took charge and th< 
party was led ashore to visit Abu Simbel. 

Poirot himself fell into step with Andrew Pennington. 

“It is your first visit to Egypt— yes?” he asked. 

“Why, no, I was here in nineteen twenty-three. That i: 
to say, I was in Cairo. I’ve never been this trip up the Nile 
before.” 


Death on the Nile 


1 17 

“You came over on the Carmanic, I believe— at least so 
ladame Doyle was telling me.” 

Pennington shot a shrewd glance in his direction. 

“Why, yes, that is so,” he admitted. 

“I wondered if you had happened to come across some 
fiends of mine who were aboard— the Rushington Smiths.” 
“I can’t recall anyone of that name. The boat was full 
id we had bad weather. A lot of passengers hardly ap- 
eared, and in any case the voyage is so short one doesn’t 
et to know who is on board and who isn’t.” 

“Yes, that is very true. What a pleasant surprise your 
anning into Madame Doyle and her husband. You had no 
lea they were married?” 

“No. Mrs. Doyle had written me, but the letter was for- 
warded on and I only received it some days after our un- 
xpected meeting in Cairo.” 

“You have known her for very many years, I under- 
rand?” 

“Why, I should say I have. Monsieur Poirot. I’ve known 
innet Ridgeway since she was just a cute little thing so 
igh— ” He made an illustrating gesture. “Her father and I 
were lifelong friends. A very remarkable man, Melhuish 
.idgeway— and a very successful one.” 

“His daughter comes into a considerable fortune, I un- 
•erstand. . . . Ah, pardon — perhaps it is not delicate what 
say there.” 

Andrew Pennington seemed slightly amused. 

“Oh, that’s pretty common knowledge. Yes, Linnet’s a 
r ealthy woman.” 

“I suppose, though, that the recent slump is bound to 
feet any stocks, however sound they may be?” 
Pennington took a moment or two to answer. He said 


1 1 8 Death on the Nile 

at last: “That, of course, is true to a certain extent. Th 
position is very difficult in these days.” 

Poirot murmured, “I should imagine, however, that Ma 
dame Doyle has a keen business head.” 

“That is so. Yes, that is so. Linnet is a clever practica 
girl.” 

They came to a halt. The guide proceeded to instruc 
them on the subject of the temple built by the grea 
Rameses. The four colossi of Rameses himself, one pair oi 
each side of the entrance, hewn out of the living rock 
looked down on the little straggling party of tourists. 

Signor Richetti, disdaining the remarks of the dragoman 
was busy examining the reliefs of Negro and Syrian cap 
fives on the bases of the colossi on either side of the en 
trance. 

When the party entered the temple, a sense of dim 
ness and peace came over them. The still vividly coloured 
reliefs on some of the inner walls were pointed out, bu 
the party tended to break up into groups. 

Dr. Bessner read sonorously in German from a Baedeker 
pausing every now and then to translate for the benefit oi 
Cornelia, who walked in a docile manner beside him. Thi: 
was not to continue, however. Miss Van Schuyler, enter- 
ing on the arm of the phlegmatic Miss Bowers, uttered i 
commanding “Cornelia, come here,” and the instructior 
had perforce to cease. Dr. Bessner beamed after her vaguely 
through his thick lenses. 

“A very nice maiden, that,” he announced to Poirot 
“She does not look so starved as some of these young 
women. No, she has the nice curves. She listens too, very 
intelligently; it is a pleasure to instruct her.” 

It fleeted across Poirot’s mind that it seemed to be Cor- 


Death on the Nile 


11 9 

Delia’s fate either to be bullied or instructed. In any case 
ae was always the listener, never the talker. 

Miss Bowers, momentarily released by the peremptory 
ummons of Cornelia, was standing in the middle of the 
i;mple, looking about her with her cool, incurious gaze, 
[er reaction to the wonders of the past was succinct. 
“The guide says the name of one of these gods or god- 
esses was Mut. Can you beat it?” 

There was an inner sanctuary where sat four figures 
cernally presiding, strangely dignified in their dim aloof- 
IpSS. 

Before them stood Linnet and her husband. Her arm 
'as in his, her face lifted— a typical face of the new civili- 
ation, intelligent, curious, untouched by the past. 

Simon said suddenly: “Let’s get out of here. I don’t like 
nese four fellows— especially the one in the high hat.” 

“That’s Amon, I suppose. And that one is Rameses. 
why don’t you like them? I think they’re very impres- 
Ive.” 

“They’re a damned sight too impressive; there’s some- 
p»ing uncanny about them. Come out into the sunlight.” 
Linnet laughed but yielded. 

They came out of the temple into the sunshine with 
Pie sand yellow and warm about their feet. Linnet began 
in laugh. At their feet in a row, presenting a momentarily 
imesome appearance as though sawn from their bodies, 
ere the heads of half a dozen Nubian boys. The eyes 
oiled, the heads moved rhythmically from side to side, 
hie lips chanted a new invocation: 

“Hip, hip hurray! Hip, hip hurray! Very good, very 
kce. Thank you very much.” 

j “How absurd! How do they do it? Are they really 


120 


Death on the Nile 


buried very deep?” 

Simon produced some small change. 

“Very good, very nice, very expensive,” he mimicket 

Two small boys in charge of the “show” picked up th 
coins neatly. 

Linnet and Simon passed on. They had no wish to r< 
turn to the boat, and they were weary of sight-seeinj 
They settled themselves with their backs to the cliff an 
let the warm sun bake them through. 

“How lovely the sun is,” thought Linnet. “How warm- 
how safe. . . . How lovely it is to be happy. . . . Hoi 
lovely to be me— me . . . me . . . Linnet . . .” 

Her eyes closed. She was half asleep, half awake, drifil j 
ing in the midst of thought that was like the sand driftin 
and blowing. 

Simon’s eyes were open. They too held contentmen 
What a fool he’d been to be rattled that first night. . . 
There was nothing to be rattled about. . . . Everythin 
was all right. . . . After all, one could trust Jackie— 

There was a shout— people running toward him wavin 1 
their arms— shouting. ... 1 

Simon stared stupidly for a moment. Then he sprang t 
his feet and dragged Linnet with him. 

Not a minute too soon. A big boulder hurtling dow 
the cliff crashed pass them. If Linnet had remained whei 1 
she was she would have been crushed to atoms. 

White-faced they clung together. Hercule Poirot an 
Tim Allerton ran up to them. 

“Ma foi, Madame, that was a near thing.” 

All four instinctively looked up at the cliff. There wi a 
nothing to be seen. But there was a path along the to] 
Poirot remembered seeing some natives walking along the] 


Death on the Nile 


I 2 I 


nen they had first come ashore. 

He looked at the husband and wife. Linnet looked dazed 
ill— bewildered. Simon, however, was inarticulate with 
fee. 

“God damn her!” he ejaculated. 

He checked himself with a quick glance at Tim Aller- 

The latter said: “Phew, that was near! Did some fool 
3 wl that thing over, or did it get detached on its own?” 

. Linnet was very pale. She said with difficulty, “I think 
-ome fool must have done it.” 

“Might have crushed you like an eggshell. Sure you 
aven’t got an enemy, Linnet?” 

Linnet swallowed twice and found a difficulty in an- 
rering the light-hearted raillery. 

“Come back to the boat, Madame,” Poirot said quickly, 
“ou must have a restorative.” 

. They walked there quietly, Simon still full of pent-up 
rge, Tim trying to talk cheerfully and distract Linnet’s 
ind from the danger she had run, Poirot with a grave 

|e. 

. And then, just as they reached the gangplank, Simon 
Hipped dead. A look of amazement spread over his face. 
Jacqueline de Belief ort was just coming ashore. Dressed 
tblue gingham, she looked childish this morning. 

“Good God!” said Simon under his breath. “So it was 
l) accident, after all.” 

The anger went out of his face. An overwhelming re- 
i : showed so plainly that Jacqueline noticed something 
biss. 

; ‘Good-morning,” she said. “I’m afraid I’m a little on the 
Bp side.” 


122 


Death on the Nile 


She gave them all a nod and stepped ashore and prc 
ceeded in the direction of the temple. 

Simon clutched Poirot’s arm. The other two had gon 

on. 

“My God, that’s a relief. I thought— I thought—” 

Poirot nodded. “Yes, yes, I know what you thought. 
But he himself still looked grave and preoccupied. H 
turned his head and noted carefully what had become c 
the rest of the party from the ship. 

Miss Van Schuyler was slowly returning on the arm c 
Miss Bowers. 

A little further away Mrs. Allerton was standing laugt 
ing at the little Nubian row of heads. Mrs. Otterbourn 
was with her. 

The others were nowhere in sight. 

Poirot shook his head as he followed Simon slowly ont 
the boat. 


CHAPTER X 


Will you explain to me, Madame, the meaning of 
he word ‘fey’?” 

Mrs. Allerton looked slightly surprised. She and Poirot 
/ere toiling slowly up to the rock overlooking the Sec- 
nd Cataract. Most of the others had gone up on camels, 
ut Poirot had felt that the motion of the camel was 
ightly reminiscent of that of a ship. Mrs. Allerton had 
ut it on the grounds of personal dignity. 

They had arrived at Wadi Haifa the night before. This 
lorning two launches had conveyed all the party to the 
econd Cataract, with the exception of Signor Richetti, 
fho had insisted on making an excursion of his own to 
remote spot called Semna, which, he explained, was of 
aramount interest as being the gateway of Nubia in the 
me of Amenemhet III, and where there was a stele re- 
i ording the fact that on entering Egypt Negroes must pay 
iistom duties. Everything had been done to discourage 
lis example of individuality, but with no avail. Signor 
ichetti was determined and had waved aside each objec- 
on: (i) that the expedition was not worth making, (2) 
lat the expedition could not be made, owing to the im- 
ossibility of getting a car there, (3) that no car could be 
Stained to do the trip, (4) that a car would be a prohibi- 
ve price. Having scoffed at 1, expressed incredulity at 
offered to find a car himself to 3, and bargained fluently 
Arabic for 4, Signor Richetti had at last departed— his 

123 


I2 4 


Death on the Nile 

departure being arranged in a secret and furtive manner, 
in case some of the other tourists should take it into their 
heads to stray from the appointed paths of sight-seeing. 

“ ‘Fey’?” Mrs. Allerton put her head on one side as she 
considered her reply. “Well, it’s a Scotch word, really. It 
means the kind of exalted happiness that comes before dis- 
aster. You know— it’s too good to be true.” 

She enlarged on the theme. Poirot listened attentively. 

“I thank you, Madame. I understand now. It is odd that 
you should have said that yesterday— when Madame Doyle 
was to escape death so shortly afterward.” 

Mrs. Allerton gave a little shiver. 

“It must have been a very near escape. Do you think 
some of those little black wretches rolled it over for fun? 
It’s the sort of thing boys might do all over the world— 
not perhaps really meaning any harm.” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“It may be, Madame.” 

He changed the subject, talking of Majorca and asking 
various practical questions from the point of view of a 
possible visit. 

Mrs. Allerton had grown to like the little man very 
much— partly perhaps out of a contradictory spirit. Tim. 
she felt, was always trying to make her less friendly tc 
Hercule Poirot, whom he summarized firmly as “the worsi 
kind of bounder.” But she herself did not call him a boun- 
der; she supposed it was his somewhat foreign exotic 
clothing which roused her son’s prejudices. She herseli 
found him an intelligent and stimulating companion. He 
was also extremely sympathetic. She found herself sud- | 
denly confiding in him her dislike of Joanna Southwood 
It eased her to talk of the matter. And after all, why not! , 


Death on the Nile 


125 


de did not know Joanna— would probably never meet her. 
Vhy should she not ease herself of that constantly borne 
lurden of jealous thought? 

At that same moment Tim and Rosalie Otterbourne 
pere talking of her. Tim had just been half jestingly abus- 
tig his luck. His rotten health, never bad enough to be 
eally interesting, yet not good enough for him to have 
ted the life he would have chosen. Very little money, no 
ongenial occupation. 

“A thoroughly lukewarm, tame existence,” he finished 
'iscontentedly. 

Rosalie said abruptly, “You’ve got something heaps of 
ieople would envy you.” 

“What’s that?” 

“Your mother.” 

Tim was surprised and pleased. 

“Mother? Yes, of course she is quite unique. It’s nice of 
ou to see it.” 

“I think she’s marvellous. She looks so lovely— so com- 
osed and calm— as though nothing could ever touch her, 
nd yet— and yet somehow she’s always ready to be funny 
bout things too. . . .” 

Rosalie was stammering slightly in her earnestness. 

Tim felt a rising warmth toward the girl. He wished he 
ould return the compliment, but, lamentably, Mrs. Otter- 
oume was his idea of the world’s greatest menace. The 
I liability to respond in kind made him embarrassed. 

Miss Van Schuyler had stayed in the launch. She could 
ot risk the ascent either on a camel or on her legs. She 
ad said snappily: 

“I’m sorry to have to ask you to stay with me, Miss 
owers. T intended you to go and Cornelia to stay, but 


126 


Death on the Nile 


girls are so selfish. She rushed off without a word to me. 
And I actually saw her talking to that very unpleasant 
and ill-bred young man, Ferguson. Cornelia has disap- 
pointed me sadly. She has absolutely no social sense.” 

Miss Bowers replied in her usual matter-of-fact fashion, 

“That’s quite all right, Miss Van Schuyler. It would have 
been a hot walk up there, and I don’t fancy the look of 
those saddles on the camels. Fleas, as likely as not.” 

She adjusted her glasses, screwed up her eyes to look ai 
the party descending the hill and remarked: “Miss Rob- 
son isn’t with that young man any more. She’s with Dr 
Bessner.” 

Miss Van Schuyler grunted. 

Since she had discovered that Dr. Bessner had a larg< 
clinic in Czecho-Slovakia and a European reputation as j 
fashionable physician, she was disposed to be gracious t( 
him. Besides, she might need his professional services be- 
fore the journey was over. 

When the party returned to the Karnak Linnet gave : 
cry of surprise. 

“A telegram for me.” 

She snatched it off the board and tore it open. 

“Why— I don’t understand— potatoes, beetroots— wha 
does it mean, Simon?” 

Simon was just coming to look over her shoulder whei 
a furious voice said, “Excuse me, that telegram is for me,’ 
and Signor Richetti snatched it rudely from her hand, fix 
ing her with a furious glare as he did so. 

Linnet stared in surprise for a moment, then turned ove 
the envelope. 

“Oh, Simon, what a fool I am! It’s Richetti— not Ridge 
way— and anyway of course my name isn’t Ridgeway nov 


Death on the Nile 


127 


' must apologize.” 

She followed the little archaeologist up to the stern of 
he boat. 

“I am so sorry, Signor Richetti. You see my name was 
lidgeway before I married, and I haven’t been married 
r fery long, and so—” 

She paused, her face dimpled with smiles, inviting him 

0 smile upon a young bride’s faux pas. 

But Richetti was obviously “not amused.” Queen Vie- 
nna at her most disapproving could not have looked more 
jrim. 

“Names should be read carefully. It is inexcusable to be 
:areless in these matters.” 

Linnet bit her lip and her colour rose. She was not ac- 
;ustomed to have her apologies received in this fashion. 
,>he turned away and, rejoining Simon, said angrily, 
‘These Italians are really insupportable.” 

“Never mind, darling; let’s go and look at that big ivory 
: ;rocodile you liked.” 

They went ashore together. 

Poirot, watching them walk up the landing stage, heard 

1 sharp indrawn breath. He turned to see Jacqueline de 
Bellefort at his side. Her hands were clenched on the rail. 
The expression on her face, as she turned it toward him, 
quite startled him. It was no longer gay or malicious. She 
ooked devoured by some inner consuming fire. 

“They don’t care any more.” The words came low and 
: ast. “They’ve got beyond me. I can’t reach them. . . . 
They don’t mind if I’m here or not. ... I can’t— I can’t 
lurt them any more. . . .” 

Her hands on the rail trembled. 

“Mademoiselle—” 


128 


Death on the Nile 


She broke in: “Oh, it’s too late now— too late for warn- 
ing. . . . You were right. I ought not to have come. Not 
on this journey. What did you call it? A journey of the 
soul? I can’t go back; I’ve got to go on. And I’m going 
on. They shan’t be happy together; they shan’t. I’d kill 
him sooner. . . .” 

She turned abruptly away. Poirot, staring after her, felt 
a hand on his shoulder. 

“Your girl friend seems a trifle upset, Monsieur Poirot.’' 

Poirot turned. He stared in surprise, seeing an old ac- 
quaintance. 

“Colonel Race.” 

The tall bronzed man smiled. 

“Bit of a surprise, eh?” 

Hercule Poirot had come across Colonel Race a year 
previously in London. They had been fellow guests at a 
very strange dinner party— a dinner party that had ended 
in death for that strange man, their host. 

Poirot knew that Race was a man of unadvertised goings 
and comings. He was usually to be found in one of the 
outposts of Empire where trouble was brewing. 

“So you are here at Wadi Haifa,” he remarked thought- 
fully. 

“I am here on this t>oat.” 

“You mean?” 

“That I am making the return journey with you to 
Shellal.” 

Hercule Poirot’s eyebrows rose. 

“That is very interesting. Shall we, perhaps, have a little 
drink? ” 

They went into the observation saloon, now quite empty. 
Poirot ordered a whisky for the Colonel and a double 


Death on the Nile 


129 


orangeade full of sugar for himself. 

“So you make the return journey with us,” said Poirot 
ts he sipped. “You would go faster, would you not, on 
he Government steamer, which travels by night as well 
| is day?” 

Colonel Race’s face creased appreciatively. 

“You’re right on the spot as usual, Monsieur Poirot,” 
lie said pleasantly. 

“It is, then, the passengers?” 

“One of the passengers.” 

“Now which one, I wonder?” Hercule Poirot asked of 
he ornate ceiling. 

“Unfortunately I don’t know myself,” said Race rue- 
ully. 

Poirot looked interested. 

Race said: “There’s no need to be mysterious to you. 
iVe’ve had a good deal of trouble out here— one way and 
mother. It isn’t the people who ostensibly lead the rioters 
:hat we’re after. It’s the men who very cleverly put the 
natch to the gunpowder. There were three of them. One’s 
lead. One’s in prison. I want the third man— a man with 
ive or six cold-blooded murders to his credit. He’s one 
)f the cleverest paid agitators that ever existed. . . . He’s 
)n this boat. I know that from a passage in a letter that 
Dassed through our hands. Decoded it said: ‘X will be on 
:he Karnak trip February seventh to thirteenth.’ It didn’t 
;ay under what name X would be passing.” 

“Have you any description of him? ” 

“No. American, Irish and French descent. Bit of a mon- 
grel. That doesn’t help us much. Have you got any ideas?” 

“An idea— it is all very well,” said Poirot meditatively. 

Such was the understanding between them that Race 


I 30 


Death on the Nile 


pressed him no further. He knew that Hercule Poirot die 
not ever speak unless he was sure. 

Poirot rubbed his nose and said unhappily, “There passe; 
itself something on this boat that causes me much in- 
quietude.” 

Race looked at him inquiringly. 

“Figure to yourself,” said Poirot, “a person A who has 
grievously wronged a person B. The person B desires the 
revenge. The person B makes the threats.” 

“A and B being both on this boat?” 

Poirot nodded. “Precisely.” 

“And B, I gather, being a woman?” 

“Exactly.” 

Race lit a cigarette. 

“I shouldn’t worry. People who go about talking ol 
what they are going to do don’t usually do it.” 

“And particularly is that the case with les jemmes, you 
would say! Yes, that is true.” 

But he still did not look happy. 

“Anything else?” asked Race. 

“Yes, there is something. Yesterday the person A had a 
very near escape from death, the kind of death that might 
very conveniently be called an accident.” 

“Engineered by B?” 

“No, that is just the point. B could have had nothing to 
do with it.” 

“Then it was an accident.” 

“I suppose so— but I do not like such accidents.” 

“You’re quite sure B could have had no hand in it?” 

“Absolutely.” 

“Oh, well, coincidences do happen. Who is A, by the 
way? A particularly disagreeable person?” 


Death on the Nile 


1 3 1 

“On the contrary. A is a charming, rich and beautiful 
mung lady.” 

Race grinned. 

“Sounds quite like a novelette.” 

‘ l Peut-etre . But I tell you, I am not happy, my friend, 
flam right, and after all I am constantly in the habit of 
>eing right”— Race smiled into his moustache at this typi- 
cal utterance— “then there is matter for grave inquietude. 
Vnd now, you come to add yet another complication. You 
ell me that there is a man on the Karnak who kills.” 

“He doesn’t usually kill charming young ladies.” 

Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner. 

“I am afraid, my friend,” he said. “I am afraid. . . . 
Today, I advised this lady, Madame Doyle, to go with 
ler husband to Khartum, not to return on this boat. But 
hey would not agree. I pray to Heaven that we may 
trrive at Shellal without catastrophe.” 

“Aren’t you taking rather a gloomy view?” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“I am afraid,” he said simply. “Yes, I, Hercule Poirot, 
im afraid. . . .” 


CHAPTER XI 



£ 




Cornelia Robson stood inside the temple of Abu Sim- 
bel. It was the evening of the following day— a hot stil 
evening. The Karnak was anchored once more at Abi 
Simbel to permit a second visit to be made to the temple 
this time by artificial light. The difference this made was 
considerable, and Cornelia commented wonderingly or 
the fact to Mr. Ferguson, who was standing by her side. 

“Why, you see it ever so much better now!” she ex- 
claimed. “All those enemies having their heads cut off b) 
the King— they just stand right out. That’s a cute kind oi 
castle there that I never noticed before. I wish Dr. Bess 
ner was here, he’d tell me what it was.” 

“How you can stand that old fool beats me,” said Fer 
guson gloomily. 

“Why, he’s just one of the kindest men I’ve ever met!’ 

“Pompous old bore.” 

“I don’t think you ought to speak that way.” 

The young man gripped her suddenly by the arm. The) 
were just emerging from the temple into the moonlight. 

“Why do you stick being bored by fat old men— anc 
bullied and snubbed by a vicious old harridan?” 

“Why, Mr. Ferguson!” 

“Haven’t you got any spirit? Don’t you know you’n 
just as good as she is?” 

“But I’m not!” Cornelia spoke with honest conviction 

“You’re not as rich; that’s all you mean.” 

132 




Death on the Nile 


133 


“No, it isn’t. Cousin Marie’s very, very cultured, and—” 

“Cultured!” The young man let go of her arm as sud- 
lenly as he had taken it. “That word makes me sick.” 

Cornelia looked at him in alarm. 

“She doesn’t like you talking to me, does she?” asked 
he young man. 

Cornelia blushed and looked embarrassed. 

“Why? Because she thinks I’m not her social equal! Pah! 
)oesn’t that make you see red?” 

Cornelia faltered out, “I wish you wouldn’t get so mad 
bout things.” 

“Don’t you realize— and you an American— that every- 
me is born free and equal?” 

“They’re not,” said Cornelia with calm certainty. 

“My good girl, it’s part of your constitution!” 

1 “Cousin Marie says politicians aren’t gentlemen,” said 
Cornelia. “And of course people aren’t equal. It doesn’t 
nake sense. I know I’m kind of homely looking, and I 
ised to feel mortified about it sometimes, but I’ve got over 
hat. I’d like to have been born elegant and beautiful like 
drs. Doyle, but I wasn’t, so I guess it’s no use worrying.” 

“Mrs. Doyle!” exclaimed Ferguson with deep contempt. 
She’s the sort of woman who ought to be shot as an ex- 
mple.” 

Cornelia looked at him anxiously. 

“I believe it’s your digestion,” she said kindly. “I’ve got 

special kind of pepsin that Cousin Marie tried once. 
Vould you like to try it?” 

Mr. Ferguson said, “You’re impossible!” 

He turned and strode away. Cornelia went on toward 
he boat. Just as she was crossing onto the gangway, he 
aught her up cnee more. 


134 


Death on the Nile 


“You’re the nicest person on the boat,” he said. “And 
mind you remember it.” 

Blushing with pleasure Cornelia repaired to the observa- 
tion saloon. Miss Van Schuyler was conversing with Dr. 
Bessner— an agreeable conversation dealing with certain 
royal patients of his. 

Cornelia said guiltily, “I do hope I haven’t been a long 
time, Cousin Marie.” 

Glancing at her watch the old lady snapped: “Yon 
haven’t exactly hurried, my dear. And what have yon 
done with my velvet stole?” 

Cornelia looked round. 

“Shall I see if it’s in the cabin, Cousin Marie?” 

“Of course it isn’t! I had it just after dinner in here 
and I haven’t moved out of the place. It was on that chair.’ 

Cornelia made a desultory search. 

“I can’t see it anywhere, Cousin Marie.” 

“Nonsense!” said Miss Van Schuyler. “Look about.” It 
was an order such as one might give to a dog, and in hei 
doglike fashion Cornelia obeyed. The quiet Mr. Fanthorp 
who was sitting at a table near by, rose and assisted her 
But the stole could not be found. 

The day had been such an unusually hot and sultry on< 
that most people had retired early after going ashore t( 
view the temple. The Doyles were playing Bridge wit! 
Pennington and Race at a table in a corner. The only other 
occupant of the saloon was Hercule Poirot, who wa: 
yawning his head off at a small table near the door. 

Miss Van Schuyler, making a Royal Progress bedward 
with Cornelia and Miss Bowers in attendance, paused bj 
his chair. He sprang politely to his feet, stifling a yawn o 
gargantuan dimensions. 




Death on the Nile 


*35 


Miss Van Schuyler said: “I have only just realized Who 
ou are. Monsieur Poirot. I may tell you that I have heard 
f you from my old friend Rufus Van Aldin. You must 
f >11 me about your cases sometime.” 

Poirot, his eyes twinkling a little through their sleepi- 
ess, bowed in an exaggerated manner. With a kindly but 
jondescending nod, Miss Van Schuyler passed on. 

Poirot yawned once more. He felt heavy and stupid 
'nth sleep ana could hardly keep his eyes open. He glanced 
liver at the Bridge players, absorbed in their game, then 
t young Fant torp, who was deep in a book. Apart from 
lem the saloon was empty. 

He passed through the swinging door out onto the deck. 
1 acqueline de Bellefort, coming precipitately along the 
eck, almost collided with him. 

“Pardon, Mademoiselle.” 

She said, “You look sleepy, Monsieur Poirot.” 

He admitted it frankly. 

“ Mais oui — I am consumed with sleep. I can hardly keep 
■iy eyes open. It has been a day very close and oppressive.” 

“Yes.” She seemed to brood over it. “It’s been the sort 
' f day when things— snap! Break! When one can’t go 
n. . . .” 

Her voice was low and charged with passion. She looked 
ot at him, but toward the sandy shore. Her hands were 
lenched, rigid. . . . 

Suddenly the tension relaxed. She said, “Good-night, 
lonsieur Poirot.” 

“Good-night, Mademoiselle.” 

Her eyes met his, just for a swift moment. Thinking it 
( ver the next day, he came to the conclusion that there 
ad been appeal in that glance. He was to remember it 


Death on the Nile 


136 

afterward. . . . 

Then he passed on to his cabin and she went toward 
the saloon. 

Cornelia, having dealt with Miss Van Schuyler’s many 
needs and fantasies, took some needlework with her back 
to the saloon. She herself did not feel in the least sleepy. 
On the contrary she felt wide awake and slightly excited. 

The Bridge four were still at it. In another chair the 
quiet Fanthorp read a book. Cornelia sat down to her 
needlework. 

Suddenly the door opened and Jacqueline de Bellefort 
came in. She stood in the doorway, her head thrown back. 
Then she pressed a bell and sauntered across to Cornelia 
and sat down. > 

“Been ashore?” she asked. 

“Yes. I thought it was just fascinating in the moonlight.” 

Jacqueline nodded. 

“Yes, lovely night. ... A real honeymoon night.” 

Her eyes went to the Bridge table— rested a moment on 
Linnet Doyle. 

The boy came in answer to the bell. Jacqueline ordered 
a double gin. As she gave the order Simon Doyle shot a 
quick glance at her. A faint line of anxiety showed be- 
tween his eyebrows. 

His wife said, “Simon, we’re waiting for you to call.” 

Jacqueline hummed a little tune to herself. When the 
drink came, she picked it up, said, “Well, here’s to crime,” 
drank it off and ordered another. 

Again Simon looked across from the Bridge table. His 
calls became slightly absent-minded. His partner, Penning- 
ton, took him to task. 


Death on the Nile 


i37 

Jacqueline began to hum again, at first under her breath, 
:hen louder: 

“He 'was her man and he did her wrong . . 

“Sorry,” said Simon to Pennington. “Stupid of me not 
:o return your lead. That gives ’em rubber.” 

Linnet rose to her feet. 

“I’m sleepy. I think I’ll go to bed.” 

“About time to turn in,” said Colonel Race. 

“I’m with you,” agreed Pennington. 

“Coming, Simon?” 

Doyle said slowly: “Not just yet. I think I’ll have a 
Irink first.” 

Linnet nodded and went out. Race followed her. Pen- 
lington finished his drink and then followed suit. 

Cornelia began to gather up her embroidery. 

“Don’t go to bed, Miss Robson,” said Jacqueline. “Please 
lon’t. I feel like making a night of it. Don’t desert me.” 

Cornelia sat down again. 

“We girls must stick together,” said Jacqueline. 

She threw back her head and laughed— a shrill laugh 
vithout merriment. 

The second drink came. 

“Have something,” said Jacqueline. 

“No, thank you very much,” replied Cornelia. 

Jacqueline tilted back her chair. She hummed now 
oudly: 

“He was her man and he did her wrong . . .” 

Mr. Fanthorp turned a page of Europe pom Within. 

Simon Doyle picked up a magazine. 

“Really, I think I’ll go to bed,” said Cornelia. “It’s get- 
ing very late.” 

“You can’t go to bed yet,” Jacqueline declared. “I for- 


Death on the Nile 


138 

bid you to. Tell me all about yourself.” 

“Well— I don’t know. There isn’t much to tell,” Cor- 
nelia faltered. “I’ve just lived at home, and I haven’t been 
around much. This is my first trip to Europe. I’m just lov- 
ing every minute of it.” 

Jacqueline laughed. 

“You’re a happy sort of person, aren’t you? God, I’d 
like to be you.” 

“Oh! would you? But I mean— I’m sure—” 

Cornelia felt flustered. Undoubtedly Miss de Bellefort 
was drinking too much. That wasn’t exactly a novelty to 
Cornelia. She had seen plenty of drunkenness during Pro- 
hibition years. But there was something else. . . . Jac- 
queline de Bellefort was talking to her— was looking at 
her— and yet, Cornelia felt, it was as though, somehow, 
she was talking to someone else. . . . 

But there were only two other people in the room, Mr. 
Fanthorp and Mr. Doyle. Mr. Fanthorp seemed quite ab- 
sorbed in his book. Mr. Doyle was looking rather odd— 
a queer sort of watchful look on his face. . . . 

Jacqueline said again, “Tell me all about yourself.” 

Always obedient, Cornelia tried to comply. She talked, 
rather heavily, going into unnecessary small details about 
her daily life. She was so unused to being the talker. Her 
role was so constantly that of listener. And yet Miss de 
Bellefort seemed to want to know. When Cornelia faltered 
to a standstill, the other girl was quick to prompt her. 

“Go on— tell me more.” 

And so Cornelia went on (“Of course, Mother’s very 
delicate— some days she touches nothing but cereals—”) un- 
happily conscious th t all she said was supremely unin- 
teresting, yet flattered by the other girl’s seeming interest. 


Death on the Nile 


139 


3ut was she interested? Wasn’t she, somehow, listening to 
something else— or, perhaps, for something else? She was 
ooking at Cornelia, yes, but wasn’t there really someone 
dse, sitting in the room. 

“And of course we get very good art classes, and last 
vinter I had a course of—” 

(How late was it? Surely very late. She had been talk- 
ng and talking. If only something definite would happen—) 

And immediately, as though in answer to the wish, some- 
ching did happen. Only, at the moment, it seemed very 
latural. 

Jacqueline turned her head and spoke to Simon Doyle. 

“Ring the bell, Simon. I want another drink.” 

Simon Doyle looked up from his magazine and said 
juietly: “The stewards have gone to bed. It’s after mid- 
light.” 

“I tell you I want another drink.” 

Simon said, “You’ve had quite enough drinks, Jackie.” 

She swung round at him. 

“What damned business is it of yours?” 

He shrugged his shoulders. “None.” 

She watched him for a minute or two. Then she said: 
What’s the matter, Simon? Are you afraid?” 

Simon did not answer. Rather elaborately he picked up 
lis magazine again. 

! Cornelia murmured, “Oh, dear— as late as that— I must—” 

She began to fumble, dropped a thimble. . . . 

Jacqueline said: “Don’t go to bed. I’d like another 
voman here— to support me.” She began to laugh again. 
‘Do you know what Simon over there is afraid of? He’s 
ifraid /’m going to tell you the story of my life.” 

“Oh— er— ” Cornelia spluttered a little. 


140 Death on the Nile 

Jacqueline said clearly, “You see, he and I were once 
engaged.” 

“Oh, really?” 

Cornelia was the prey of conflicting emotions. She was 
deeply embarrassed but at the same time pleasurably 
thrilled. How— how black Simon Doyle was looking. 

“Yes, it’s a very sad story,” said Jacqueline; her soft 
voice was low and mocking. “He treated me rather badly, 
didn’t you, Simon?” 

Simon Doyle said brutally: “Go to bed, Jackie. You’re 
drunk.” 

“If you’re embarrassed, Simon dear, you’d better leave 
the room.” 

Simon Doyle looked at her. The hand that held the 
magazine shook a little, but he spoke bluntly. 

“I’m staying,” he said. 

Cornelia murmured for the third time, “I really must- 
it’s so late—” 

“You’re not to go,” said Jacqueline. Her hand shot out 
and held the other girl in her chair. “You’re to stay and 
hear what I’ve got to say.” 

“Jackie,” said Simon sharply, “you’re making a fool of 
yourself! For God’s sake, go to bed.” 

Jacqueline sat up suddenly in her chair. Words poured 
from her rapidly in a soft hissing stream. 

“You’re afraid of a scene, aren’t you? That’s because 
you’re so English— so reticent! You want me to behave 
‘decently,’ don’t you? But I don’t care whether I behave 
decently or not! You’d better get out of here quickly— 
because I’m going to talk— a lot.” 

Jim Fanthorp carefully shut his book, yawned, glanced 
at his watch, got up and strolled out. It was a very British 


Death on the Nile 


141 

and utterly unconvincing performance. 

Jacqueline swung round in her chair and glared at 
Simon. 

“You damned fool,” she said thickly, “do you think you 
can treat me as you have done and get away with it?” 

Simon Doyle opened his lips, then shut them again. He 
sat quite still as though he were hoping that her outburst 
would exhaust itself if he said nothing to provoke her 
further. 

Jacqueline’s voice came thick and blurred. It fascinated 
Cornelia, totally unused to naked emotions of any kind. 

“I told you,” said Jacqueline, “that I’d kill you sooner 
than see you go to another woman. ... You don’t think 
I meant that? You’re wrong. I’ve only been— waiting! 
You’re my man! Do you hear? You belong to me. . . 

Still Simon did not speak. Jacqueline’s hand fumbled a 
moment or two on her lap. She leant forward. 

“I told you I’d kill you, and I meant it. . . .” Her hand 
came up suddenly with something in it that flashed and 
gleamed. “I’ll shoot you like a dog— like the dirty dog you 
are. . . . 

Now at last Simon acted. He sprang to his feet, but 
t at the same moment she pulled the trigger. . . . 

Simon half twisted— fell across a chair. . . . Cornelia 
screamed and rushed to the door. Jim Fanthorp was on 
the deck leaning over the rail. She called to him. 

“Mr. Fanthorp . . . Mr. Fanthorp. . . .” 

He ran to her; she clutched at him incoherently. . . . 

“She’s shot him— Oh! she’s shot him. . . 

Simon Doyle still lay as he had fallen half into and 
across a chair. . . . Jacqueline stood as though paralysed. 
She was trembling violently, and her eyes, dilated and 


H 2 


Death on the Nile 


frightened, were staring at the crimson stain slowly soak- 
ing through Simon’s trouser leg just below the knee where 
he held a handkerchief close against the wound. . . . 

She stammered out: 

“I didn’t mean . . . Oh, my God, I didn’t really 
mean . . 

The pistol dropped from her nervous fingers with a 
clatter on the floor. She kicked it away with her foot. It 
slid under one of the settees. 

Simon, his voice faint, murmured: “Fanthorp, for 
Heaven’s sake— there’s someone coming. . . . Say it’s all 
right— an accident— something. There mustn’t be a scandal 
over this.” 

Fanthorp nodded in quick comprehension. He wheeled 
round to the door where a startled Nubian face showed. 
He said: “All right— all right! Just fun!” 

The black face looked doubtful, puzzled, then reassured. 
The teeth showed in a wide grin. The boy nodded and 
went off. 

Fanthorp turned back. 

“That’s all right. Don’t think anybody else heard. Only 
sounded like a cork, you know. Now the next thing—” 

He was startled. Jacqueline suddenly began to weep hys- 
terically. 

“Oh, God, I wish I were dead. . . . I’ll kill myself. I’ll 
be better dead. . . . Oh, what have I done— what have I 
done?” 

Cornelia hurried to her. 

“Hush, dear, hush.” 

Simon, his brow wet, his face twisted with pain, said 
urgently: 

“Get her away. For God’s sake, get her out of here! Get 
her to her cabin, Fanthorp. Look here, Miss Robson, get 


Death on the Nile 


H3 

that hospital nurse of yours.” He looked appealingly from 
one to the other of them. “Don’t leave her. Make quite sure 
she’s safe with the nurse looking after her. Then get hold 
of old Bessner and bring him here. For God’s sake, don’t 
let any news of this get to my wife.” 

Jim Fanthorp nodded comprehendingly. The quiet 
young man was cool and competent in an emergency. 

Between them he and Cornelia got the weeping, strug- 
gling girl out of the saloon and along the deck to her 
cabin. There they had more trouble with her. She fought 
to free herself; her sobs redoubled. 

“I’ll drown myself . . . I’ll drown myself. . . . I’m not 
fit to live. . . . Oh, Simon— Simon!” 

Fanthorp said to Cornelia: “Better get hold of Miss 
Bowers. I’ll stay while you get her.” 

Cornelia nodded and hurried out. 

As soon as she left, Jacqueline clutched Fanthorp. 

“His leg— it’s bleeding— broken. . . . He may bleed to 
death. I must go to him. . . . Oh, Simon— Simon— how 
could I?” 

Her voice rose. Fanthorp said urgently: “Quietly— 
quietly. . . . He’ll be all right.” 

She began to struggle again. 

“Let me go! Let me throw myself overboard. . . . Let 
me kill myself!” 

Fanthorp, holding her by the shoulders, forced her back 
onto the bed. 

“You must stay here. Don’t make a fuss. Pull yourself 
together. It’s all right, I tell you.” 

To his relief, the distraught girl did manage to control 
herself a little, but he was thankful when the curtains were 
pushed aside and the efficient Miss Bowers, neatly dressed 
in a hideous kimono, entered, accompanied by Cornelia. 


144 


Death on the Nile 


“Now then,” said Miss Bowers briskly, “what’s all this?” 

She took charge without any sign of surprise and alarm. 

Fanthorp thankfully left the overwrought girl in her 
capable hands and hurried along to the cabin occupied by 
Dr. Bessner. He knocked and entered on the top of the 
knock. 

“Dr. Bessner?” 

A terrific snore resolved itself, and a startled voice asked: 
“So? What is it?” 

By this time Fanthorp had switched the light on. The 
doctor blinked up at him, looking rather like a large owl. 

“It’s Doyle. He’s been shot. Miss de Bellefort shot him. 
He’s in the saloon. Can you come?” 

The stout doctor reacted promptly. He asked a few curt 
questions, pulled on his bedroom slippers and a dressing- 
gown, picked up a litde case of necessaries and accom- 
panied Fanthorp to the lounge. 

Simon had managed to get the window beside him open. 
He was leaning his head against it, inhaling the air. His 
face was a ghastly colour. 

Dr. Bessner came over to him. 

“Ha? So? What have we here?” 

A handkerchief sodden with blood lay on the carpet and 
on the carpet itself was a dark stain. 

The doctor’s examination was punctuated with Teutonic 
grunts and exclamations. 

“Yes, it is bad this. . . . The bone is fractured. And a 
big loss of blood. Herr Fanthorp, you and I must get him 
to my cabin. So— like this. He cannot walk. We must carry 
him, thus.” 

As they lifted him Cornelia appeared in the doorway. 
Catching sight of her, the doctor uttered a grunt of satis- 
faction. 


Death on the Nile 145 

“Ach, it is you? Goot. Come with us. I have need of 
assistance. You will be better than my friend here. He looks 
a little pale already.” 

Fanthorp emitted a rather sickly smile. 

“Shall I get Miss Bowers? ” he asked. 

Dr. Bessner threw a considering glance over Cornelia. 

“You will do very well, young lady,” he announced. 
“You will not faint or be foolish, hein?” 

“I can do what you tell me,” said Cornelia eagerly. 

Bessner nodded in a satisfied fashion. 

The procession passed along the deck. 

The next ten minutes was purely surgical and Mr. Jim 
Fanthorp did not enjoy it at all. He felt secretly ashamed 
of the superior fortitude exhibited by Cornelia. 

“So, that is the best I can do,” announced Dr. Bessner 
at last. “You have been a hero, my friend.” He patted 
Simon approvingly on the shoulder. Then he rolled up his 
sleeve and produced a hypodermic needle. 

“And now I will give you something to make you sleep. 
Your wife, what about her?” 

Simon said weakly: “She needn’t know till the morning. 
. . .” He went on: “I— you mustn’t blame Jackie. . . . It’s 
been all my fault. I treated her disgracefully . . . poor kid 
—she didn’t know what she was doing. . . 

Dr. Bessner nodded comprehendingly. 

“Yes, yes— I understand. . . .” 

“My fault—” Simon urged. His eyes went to Cornelia. 
“Someone— ought to— stay with her. She might— hurt her- 
self-” 

Dr. Bessner injected the needle. Cornelia said, with quiet 
competence: “It’s all right, Mr. Doyle. Miss Bowers is go- 
ing to stay with her all night. . . .” 

A grateful look flashed over Simon’s face. His body re- 


146 Death on the Nile 

laxed. His eyes closed. Suddenly he jerked them open. 
“Fanthorp?” 

“Yes, Doyle.” 

“The pistol . . . ought not to leave it . . . lying about. 
The boys will find it in the mor nin g. . . .” 

Fanthorp nodded. “Quite right. I’ll go and get hold of it 
now.” 

He went out of the cabin and along the deck. Miss 
Bowers appeared at the door of Jacqueline’s cabin. 

“She’ll be all right now,” she announced. “I’ve given her 
a morphine injection.” 

“But you’ll stay with her?” 

“Oh, yes. Morphia excites some people. I shall stay all 
night.” 

Fanthorp went on to the lounge. 

Some three minutes later there was a tap on Bessner’s 
cabin door. 

“Dr. Bessner?” 

“Yes?” The stout man appeared. 

Fanthorp beckoned him out on the deck. 

“Look here— I can’t find that pistol. . . .” 

“What is that?” 

“The pistol. It dropped out of the girl’s hand. She 
kicked it away and it went under a settee. It isn’t under 
that settee now.” 

They stared at each other. 

“But who can have taken it?” 

Fanthorp shrugged his shoulders. 

Bessner said: “It is curious, that. But I do not see what 
we can do about it.” 

Puzzled and vaguely alarmed, the two men separated. 


CHAPTER XII 


Hercule Poirot was just wiping the lather from his 
freshly shaved face when there was a quick tap on the 
door, and hard on top of it Colonel Race entered uncere- 
moniously. He closed the door behind him. 

He said: “Your instinct was quite correct. It’s hap- 
pened.” 

Poirot straightened up and asked sharply: “What has 
happened?” 

“Linnet Doyle’s dead— shot through the head last night.” 

Poirot was silent for a minute, two memories vividly be- 
fore him— a girl in a garden at Assuan saying in a hard 
breathless voice, “I’d like to put my dear little pistol 
against her head and just press the trigger,” and another 
more recent memory, the same voice saying, “One feels 
one can’t go on— the kind of day when something breaks” 
—and that strange momentary flash of appeal in her eyes. 
What had been the matter with him not to respond to that 
appeal? He had been blind, deaf, stupid with his need for 
sleep. . . . 

Race went on: “I’ve got some slight official standing; 
they sent for me, put it in my hands. The boat’s due to 
start in half an hour, but it will be delayed till I give the 
word. There’s a possibility, of course, that the murderer 
came from the shore.” 

Poirot shook his head. 

Race acquiesced in the gesture. 


Death on the Nile 


148 

“I agree. One can pretty well rule that out. Well, man, 
it’s up to you. This is your show.” 

Poirot had been attiring himself with a neat-fingered 
celerity. He said now, “I am at your disposal.” 

The two men stepped out on the deck. 

Race said: “Bessner should be there by now. I sent the 
steward for him.” 

There were four cabins de luxe, with bathrooms, on the 
boat. Of the two on the port side one was occupied by 
Dr. Bessner, the other by Andrew Pennington. On the 
starboard side the first was occupied by Miss Van Schuyler, 
and the one next to it by Linnet Doyle. Her husband’s 
dressing cabin was next door. 

A white -faced steward was standing outside the door of 
Linnet Doyle’s cabin. He opened the door for them and 
they passed inside. Dr. Bessner was bending over the bed. 
He looked up and grunted as the other two entered. 

“What can you tell us, Doctor, about this business?” 
asked Race. 

Bessner rubbed his unshaven jaw meditatively. 

“Ach! She was shot— shot at close quarters. See— here, 
just above the ear— that is where the bullet entered. A very 
little bullet— I should say a twenty-two. The pistol, it was 
held close against her head; see, there is blackening here, 
the skin is scorched.” 

Again in a sick wave of memory Poirot thought of those 
words uttered at Assuan. 

Bessner went on: “She was asleep; there was no struggle; 
the murderer crept up in the dark and shot her as she lay 
there.” 

“Ah! nonr Poirot cried out. His sense of psychology 
was outraged. Jacqueline de Belief ort creeping into a 


S.S.KARNAK 


P R O M E N A 



D E 


D E 

C K 

43 

2 2 

JAMES 

fanthorp 

42 

2 3 

T 1 M 

ALLERTON 

4' 

CORNE LI A 
ROBSON 

24 

MRS 

ALLERTON 

40 

JACQUELINE 

DE 

BELLE FORT 

2 5 

S 1 MON 
DOYLE 

38 39 

ANDREW 

PE NNINCTON 

26 27 

LINNET 

DOYLE 





3 6 37 

DR 

B ESS NER 

28 29 

MISS VAN 
SCHUYLER 

34 35 

MRSANDMI5S 
OTTER. BOURNE 

30 31 

HERCULE 

POIROT 

33 

MISS 

BOWERS 

32 

COLONEL 

RACE 


PLAN CABINS 


,50 Death on the Nile 

darkened cabin, pistol in hand— No, it did not “fit,” that 
picture. 

Bessner stared at him through his thick lenses. 

“But that is what happened, I tell you.” 

“Yes, yes. I did not mean what you thought. I was not 
contradicting you.” 

Bessner gave a satisfied grunt. 

Poirot came up and stood beside him. Linnet Doyle was 
lying on her side. Her attitude was natural and peaceful. 
But above the ear was a tiny hole with an incrustation of 
dried blood round it. 

Poirot shook his head sadly. 

Then his gaze fell on the white painted wall just in 
front of him and he drew in his breath sharply. It’s white 
neatness was marred by a big wavering letter J scrawled 
in some brownish-red medium. 

Poirot stared at it, then he leaned over the dead girl and 
very gently picked up her right hand. One finger of it was 
stained a brownish-red. 

“ Nom dCun nom (Tun nom /” ejaculated Hercule Poirot. 

“Eh? What is that?” 

Dr. Bessner looked up. 

“Ach! That.'” 

Race said: “Well, I’m damned. What do you make of 
that, Poirot?” 

Poirot swayed a little on his toes. 

“You ask me what I make of it. Eh bien, it is very simple, 
is it not? Madame Doyle is dying; she wishes to indicate 
her murderer, and so she writes with her finger, dipped in 
her own blood, the initial letter of her murderer’s name. 
Oh, yes, it is astonishingly simple.” 

“Ach! but-” 


Death on the Nile 


151 

Dr. Bessner was about to break out, but a peremptory 
xesture from Race silenced him. 

“So it strikes you like that?” he asked slowly. 

Poirot turned round on him nodding his head. 

“Yes, yes. It is, as I say, of an astonishing simplicity! It 
s so familiar, is it not? It has been done so often, in the 
Dages of the romance of crime! It is now, indeed, a little 
vieux jen! It leads one to suspect that our murderer is— old- 
: ashioned!” 

Race drew a long breath. 

“I see,” he said. “I thought at first—” He stopped. 

Poirot said with a very faint smile: “That I believed in 
ill the old cliches of melodrama? But pardon, Dr. Bessner, 
/ou were about to say—?” 

Bessner broke out gutturally: “What do I say? Pah! I 
;ay it is absurd; it is the nonsense! The poor lady she died 
nstantaneously. To dip her finger in the blood (and as 
/ou see, there is hardly any blood) and write the letter J 
lpon the wall— Bah— it is the nonsense— the melodramatic 
lonsense!” 

“ C’est Venfantillage agreed Poirot. 

“But it was done with a purpose,” suggested Race. 

“That— naturally,” agreed Poirot, and his face was grave. 

“What does J stand for?” asked Race. 

Poirot replied promptly: “J stands for Jacqueline de 
Sellefort, a young lady who declared to me less than a 
veek ago that she would like nothing better than to—” 
le paused and then deliberately quoted, “ ‘to put my dear 
ittle pistol close against her head and then just press with 
ny finger. . . ” 

u Gott im Himmel!” exclaimed Dr. Bessner. 

There was a momentary silence. Then Race drew a deep 


152 


Death on the Nile 


breath and said: “Which is just what was done here?” 

Bessner nodded. 

“That is so, yes. It was a pistol of very small calibre- 
as I say probably a twenty-two. The bullet has got to bt 
extracted, of course, before we can say definitely.” 

Race nodded in swift comprehension. Then he asked: 
“What about time of death?” 

Bessner stroked his jaw again. His finger made a rasping 
sound. 

“I would not care to be too precise. It is now eight 
o’clock. I will say, with due regard to the temperature last 
night, that she has been dead certainly six hours and prob- 
ably not longer than eight.” 

“That puts it between midnight and two a.m.” 

“That is so.” 

There was a pause. Race looked round. 

“What about her husband? I suppose he sleeps in the 
cabin next door.” 

“At the moment,” said Dr. Bessner, “he is asleep in my 
cabin.” 

Both men looked very surprised. 

Bessner nodded his head several times. 

“Ach, so. I see you have not been told about that. Mr. 
Doyle was shot last night in the saloon.” 

“Shot? By whom?” 

“By the young lady, Jacqueline de Bellefort.” 

Race asked sharply, “Is he badly hurt?” 

“Yes, the bone was splintered. I have done all that is pos- 
sible at the moment, but it is necessary, you understand, 
that the fracture should be X-rayed as soon as possible and 
proper treatment given such as is impossible on this boat.” 

Poirot murmured, “Jacqueline de Bellefort.” 


Death on the Nile 


153 


His eyes went again to the J on the wall. 

Race said abruptly: “If there is nothing more we can do 
here for the moment, let’s go below. The management has 
put the smoking-room at our disposal. We must get the de- 
tails of what happened last night.” 

They left the cabin. Race locked the door and took the 
key with him. 

“We can come back later,” he said. “The first thing to 
do is to get all the facts clear.” 

They went down to the deck below, where they found 
the Manager of the Karnak waiting uneasily in the doorway 
af the smoking-room. 

The poor man was terribly upset and worried over the 
whole business, and was eager to leave everything in Colo- 
nel Race’s hands. 

“I feel I can’t do better than leave it to you, sir, seeing 
your official position. I’d had orders to put myself at your 
disposal in the— er— other matter. If you will take charge, 
I’ll see that everythifig is done as you wish.” 

“Good man! To begin with I’d like this room kept clear 
for me and for Monsieur Poirot during the inquiry.” 

“Certainly, sir.” 

“That’s all at present. Go on with your own work. I 
know where to find you.” 

Looking slightly relieved the Manager left the room. 

Race said, “Sit down, Bessner, and let’s have the whole 
>tory of what happened last night.” 

They listened in silence to the doctor’s rumbling voice. 

“Clear enough,” said Race, when he had finished. “The 
*irl worked herself up, helped by a drink or two, and 
rnally took a pot shot at the man with a twenty-two pistol. 
Then she went along to Linnet Doyle’s cabin and shot her 


i54 


Death on the Nile 


as well.” 

But Dr. Bessner was shaking his head. 

“No, no. I do not think so. I do not think that was pos- 
sible. For one thing she would not write her own initial 
on the wall; it would be ridiculous, nicht walor?” 

“She might,” Race declared, “if she were as blindly mac 
and jealous as she sounds; she might want to— well— sigr 
her name to the crime, so to speak.” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“No, no, I do not think she would be as— as crude as 
that.” 

“Then there’s only one reason for that J. It was put 
there by someone else deliberately to throw suspicion on 
her.” 

Bessner nodded. 

“Yes, and the criminal was unlucky, because, you see, 
it is not only unlikely that the young Fraulein did the 
murder; it is also I think impossible. , ' > 

“How’s that?” 

Bessner explained Jacqueline’s hysterics and the circum- 
stances which had led Miss Bowers to take charge of her. 

“And I think— I am sure— that Miss Bowers stayed with 
her all night.” 

Race said, “If that’s so, it’s going to simplify matters 
very much.” 

“Who discovered the crime?” Poirot asked. 

“Mrs. Doyle’s maid, Louise Bourget. She went to call 
her mistress as usual, found her dead, and came out and 
flopped into the steward’s arms in a dead faint. He went 
to the Manager, who came to me. I got hold of Bessner 
and then came for you.” 

Poirot nodded. 


Death on the Nile 


i55 

Race said: “Doyle’s got to know. You say he’s asleep 
Still?” 

.Bessner nodded. “Yes, he’s still asleep in my cabin. I 
gave him a strong opiate last night.” 

Race turned to Poirot. 

“Well,” he said, “I don’t think we need detain the 
doctor any longer, eh? Thank you, Doctor.” 

Bessner rose. “I will have my breakfast, yes. And then 
[ will go back to my cabin and see if Mr. Doyle is ready 
:o wake.” 

“Thanks.” 

Bessner went out. The two men looked at each other. 

“Well, what about it, Poirot?” Race asked. “You’re the 
nan in charge. I’ll take my orders from you. You say 
vhat’s to be done.” 

Poirot bowed. 

“Eh bien he said; “we must hold the court of inquiry, 
■urst of all, I think we must verify the story of the affair 
ast night. That is to say, we must question Fanthorp and 
Vliss Robson, who were the actual witnesses of what oc- 
curred. The disappearance of the pistol is very significant.” 

Race rang a bell and sent a message by the steward. 

Poirot sighed and shook his head. “It is bad, this,” he 
nurmured. “It is bad.” 

“Have you any ideas?” asked Race curiously. 

“My ideas conflict. They are not well arranged; they 
re not orderly. There is, you see, the big fact that this 
irl hated Linnet Doyle and wanted to kill her.” 
i “You think she’s capable of it?” 

“I think so— yes.” Poirot sounded doubtful. 

“But not in this way? That’s what’s worrying you, isn’t 
' :? Not to creep into her cabin in the dark and shoot her 


Death on the Nile 


156 

while she was sleeping. It’s the cold-bloodedness that 
strikes yon as not ringing true?” 

“In a sense, yes.” 

“You think that this girl, Jacqueline de Bellefort, is 
incapable of a premeditated cold-blooded murder?” 

Poirot said slowly: “I am not sure, you see. She would 
have the brains— yes. But I doubt if, physically, she could 
bring herself to do the act. . . .” 

Race nodded. “Yes, I see. . . . Well, according to Bess- 
ner’s story, it would also have been physically impossible.” 

“If that is true it clears the ground considerably. Let us 
hope it is true.” Poirot paused and then added simply: “I 
shall be glad if it is so, for I have for that little one much 
sympathy.” 

The door opened and Fanthorp and Cornelia came in. 
Bessner followed them. 

Cornelia gasped out: “Isn’t this just awful? Poor, poor 
Mrs. Doyle! And she was so lovely too. It must have been 
a real fiend who could hurt her! And poor Mr. Doyle; 
he’ll just go half crazy when he knows! Why, even last 
night he was so frightfully worried lest she should hear 
about his accident.” 

“That is just what we want you to tell us about, Miss 
Robson,” said Race. “We want to know exactly what 
happened last night.” 

Cornelia began a little confusedly, but a question or two 
from Poirot helped matters. 

“Ah, yes, I understand. After the Bridge, Madame Doyle 
went to her cabin. Did she really go to her cabin, I 
wonder?” 

“She did,” said Race. “I actually saw her. I said good- 
night to her at the door.” 

“And the time?” 


Death on the Nile 


r 57 


“Mercy, I couldn’t say,” replied Cornelia. 

“It was twenty past eleven,” said Race. 

“Bien. Then at twenty past eleven, Madame Doyle was 
alive and well. At that moment there was, in the saloon, 
who?” 

Fanthorp answered: “Doyle was there. And Miss de 
Bellefort. Myself and Miss Robson.” 

“That’s so,” agreed Cornelia. “Mr. Pennington had a 
drink and then went off to bed.” 

“That was how much later?” 

“Oh, about three or four minutes.” 

“Before half past eleven, then?” 

“Oh, yes.” 

“So that there were left in the saloon you, Mademoiselle 
Robson, Mademoiselle de Bellefort, Monsieur Doyle and 
iMonsieur Fanthorp. What were you all doing?” 

“Mr. Fanthorp was reading a book. I’d got some em- 
broidery. Miss de Bellefort was— she was—” 

Fanthorp came to the rescue. “She was drinking pretty 
heavily.” 

“Yes,” agreed Cornelia. “She was talking to me mostly 
and asking me about things at home. And she kept saying 
things— to me mostly, but I think they were kind of 
meant for Mr. Doyle. He was getting kind of mad at her, 
but he didn’t say anything. I think he thought if he kept 
quiet she might simmer down.” 

“But she didn’t?” 

Cornelia shook her head. 

“I tried to go once or twice, but she made me stay, and 
I was getting very, very uncomfortable. And then Mr. 
Fanthorp got up and went out—” 

“It was a little embarrassing,” said Fanthorp. “I thought 


Death on the Nile 


158 

I’d make an unobtrusive exit. Miss de Bellefort was clearly 
working up for a scene.” 

“And then she pulled out the pistol,” went on Cornelia, 
“and Mr. Doyle jumped up to try and get it away from 
her, and it went off and shot him through the leg; and 
then she began to sob and cry— and I was scared to death 
and ran out after Mr. Fanthorp, and he came back with 
me, and Mr. Doyle said not to make a fuss, and one of the 
Nubian boys, heard the noise of the shot and came along, 
but Mr. Fanthorp told him it was all right; and then we 
got Jacqueline away to her cabin, and Mr. Fanthorp stayed 
with her while I got Miss Bowers.” 

Cornelia paused breathless. 

“What time was this?” asked Race. 

Cornelia said again, “Mercy, I don’t know,” but Fan- 
thorp answered promptly: 

“It must have been about twenty minutes past twelve. 
I know that it was actually half past twelve when I finally 
got to my cabin.” 

“Now let me be quite sure on one or two points,” said 
Poirot. “After Madame Doyle left the saloon, did any of 
you four leave it?” 

“No.” 

“You are quite certain Mademoiselle de Bellefort did 
not leave the saloon at all?” 

Fanthorp answered promptly: “Positive. Neither Doyle, 
Miss de Bellefort, Miss Robson, nor myself left the saloon.” 

“Good. That establishes the fact that Mademoiselle de 
Bellefort could not possibly have shot Madame Doyle 
before— let us say— twenty past twelve. Now, Mademoiselle 
Robson, you went to fetch Mademoiselle Bowers. Was 
Mademoiselle de Bellefort alone in her cabin during that 




Death on the Nile 


i59 


period?” 

“No, Mr. Fanthorp stayed with her.” 

“Good! So far, Mademoiselle de Bellefort has a perfect 
alibi. Mademoiselle Bowers is the next person to interview, 
but, before I send for her, I should like to have your opin- 
■ lion on one or two points. Monsieur Doyle, you say, was 
I (very anxious that Mademoiselle de Bellefort should not be 
left alone. Was he afraid, do you think, that she was con- 
templating some further rash act?” 

“That is my opinion,” said Fanthorp. 

“He was definitely afraid she might attack Madame 
Doyle?” 

“No.” Fanthorp shook his head. “I don’t think that was 
his idea at all. I think he was afraid she might— er— do 
something rash to herself.” 

“Suicide?” 

“Yes. You see, she seemed completely sobered and heart- 
broken at what she had done. She was full of self-reproach. 
She kept saying she would be better dead.” 

' Cornelia said timidly: “I think he was rather upset about 
her. He spoke— quite nicely. He said it was all his fault— 
that he’d treated her badly. He— he was really very nice.” 

Hercule Poirot nodded thoughtfully. 

“Now about the pistol,” he went on. “What happened 
to that?” 

“She dropped it,” said Cornelia. 

“And afterward?” 

Fanthorp explained how he had gone back to search for 
it, but had not been able to find it. 

“Aha!” said Poirot. “Now we begin to arrive. Let us, I 
pray you, be very precise. Describe to me exactly what 
happened.” 


i6o 


Death on the Nile 


“Miss de Bellefort let it fall. Then she kicked it away 
from her with her foot.” 

“She sort of hated it,” explained Cornelia. “I know just 
what she felt.” 

“And it went under a settee, you say. Now be very care- 
ful. Mademoiselle de Bellefort did not recover that pistol 
before she left the saloon?” 

Both Fanthorp and Cornelia were positive on that point. 

“ Frecisement . I seek only to be very exact, you com- 
prehend. Then we arrive at this point. When Mademoiselle 
de Bellefort leaves the saloon the pistol is under the settee, 
and, since Mademoiselle de Bellefort is not left alone— 
Monsieur Fanthorp, Mademoiselle Robson or Mademoiselle 
Bowers being with her— she has no opportunity to get back 
the pistol after she left the saloon. What time was it, Mon- 
sieur Fanthorp, when you went back to look for it?” 

“It must have been just before half past twelve.” 

“And how long would have elapsed between the time 
you and Dr. Bessner carried Monsieur Doyle out of the 
saloon until you returned to look for the pistol?” 

“Perhaps five minutes— perhaps a little more.” 

“Then in that five minutes someone removes that pistol 
from where it lay out of sight under the settee. That some- 
one was not Mademoiselle de Bellefort. Who was it? It 
seems highly probable that the person who removed it was 
the murderer of Madame Doyle. We may assume, too, that 
that person had overheard or seen something of the events 
immediately preceding.” 

“I don’t see how you make that out,” objected Fan- 
thorp. 

“Because,” said Hercule Poirot, “you have just told us 
that the pistol was out of sight under the settee. Therefore 


Death on the Nile 


161 


it is hardly credible that it was discovered by accident. It 
was taken by someone who knew it was there. Therefore 
that someone must have assisted at the scene.” 

Fanthorp shook his head. “I saw no one when I went out 
on the deck just before the shot was fired.” 

“Ah, but you went out by the door on the starboard 
side.” 

“Yes. The same side as my cabin.” 

“Then if there had been anybody at the port door look- 
ing through the glass you would not have seen him?” 

“No,” admitted Fanthorp. 

“Did anyone hear the shot except the Nubian boy?” 

“Not as far as I know.” 

Fanthorp went on: “You see, the windows in here were 
all closed. Miss Van Schuyler felt a draught earlier in the 
evening. The swing doors were shut. I doubt if the shot 
would be at all clearly heard. It would only sound like the 
pop of a cork.” 

Race said, “As far as I know, no one seems to have heard 
the other shot— the shot that killed Mrs. Doyle.” 

“That we will inquire into presently,” said Poirot. “For 
the moment we still concern ourselves with Mademoiselle 
de Bellefort. We must speak to Mademoiselle Bowers. But 
first, before you go”— he arrested Fanthorp and Cornelia 
with a gesture— “you will give me a little information about 
yourselves. Then it will not be necessary to call you again 
later. You first, Monsieur— your full name.” 

“James Lechdale Fanthorp.” 

“Address? ” 

“Glasmore House, Market Donnington, Northampton- 
shire.” 

“Your profession?” 


162 


Death on the Nile 


“I am a lawyer.” 

“And your reasons for visiting this country?” 

There was a pause. For the first time the impassive Mr. 
Fanthorp seemed taken aback. He said at last— almost mum- 
bling the words, “Er— pleasure.” 

“Aha!” said Poirot. “You take the holiday; that is it, 
yes?” 

“Er— yes.” 

“Very well, Monsieur Fanthorp. Will you give me a 
brief account of your own movements last night after the 
events we have just been narrating?” 

“I went straight to bed.” 

“That was at—?” 

“Just after half past twelve.” 

“Your cabin is number twenty-two on the starboard 
side— the one nearest the saloon? ” 

“Yes.” 

“I will ask you one more question. Did you hear any- 
thing— anything at all— after you went to your cabin?” 

Fanthorp considered. 

“I turned in very quickly. I think I heard a kind of 
splash just as I was dropping off to sleep. Nothing else.” . 

“You heard a kind of splash? Near at hand?” 

Fanthorp shook his head. 

“Really, I couldn’t say. I was half asleep.” 

“And what time would that be?” 

“It might have been about one o’clock. I can’t really 
say.” 

“Thank you, Monsieur Fanthorp. That is all.” 

Poirot turned his attention to Cornelia. 

“And now, Mademoiselle Robson? Your full name?” 

“Cornelia Ruth. And my address is The Red House, 




Death on the Nile 


163 


Sellfield, Connecticut.” 

“What brought you to Egypt?” 

“Cousin Marie, Miss Van Schuyler, brought me along on 
. trip.” 

“Had you ever met Madame Doyle previous to this 
.ourney?” 

“No, never.” 

“And what did you do last night?” 

“I went right to bed after helping Dr. Bessner with Mr. 
)oyle’s leg.” 

“Your cabin is—?” 

“Forty-three on the port side— right next door to Miss 
le Bellefort.” 

“And did you hear anything?” 

Cornelia shook her head. 

“I didn’t hear a thing.” 

“No splash?” 

‘No, but then I wouldn’t, because the boat’s against 
I he bank my side.” 

Poirot nodded. 

“Thank you, Mademoiselle Robson. Now perhaps you 
vill be so kind as to ask Mademoiselle Bowers to come 
lere.” 

Fanthorp and Cornelia went out. 

“That seems clear enough,” said Race. “Unless three 
| ^dependent witnesses are lying, Jacqueline de Bellefort 
ouldn’t have got hold of the pistol. But somebody did. 
ind somebody overheard the scene. And somebody was 
[it. F. enough to write a big J on the wall.” 

There was a tap on the door and Miss Bowers entered. 
The hospital nurse sat down in her usual composed, effi- 
ient manner. In answer to Poirot she gave her name, ad- 


Death on the Nile 


164 

dress, and qualifications, adding, “I’ve been looking after 
Miss Van Schuyler for over two years now.” 

“Is Mademoiselle Van Schuyler’s health very bad?” 

“Why, no, I wouldn’t say that,” replied Miss Bowers. 
“She’s not very young, and she’s nervous about herself, 
and she likes to have a nurse around handy. There’s noth- 
ing serious the matter with her. She just likes plenty of 
attention, and she’s willing to pay for it.” 

Poirot nodded comprehendingly. Then he said, “I under- 
stand that Mademoiselle Robson fetched you last night?” 

“Why, yes, that’s so.” 

“Will you tell me exactly what happened?” 

“Well, Miss Robson just gave me a brief outline of wh^|J| 
had occurred, and I came along with her. I found Miss 
de Bellefort in a very excited, hysterical condition.” 

“Did she utter any threats against Madame Doyle?” 

“No, nothing of that kind. She was in a condition of 
morbid self-reproach. She’d taken a good deal of alcohol, 

I should say, and she was suffering from reaction. I didn’t 
think she ought to be left. I gave her a shot of morphia 
and sat up with her.” 

“Now, Mademoiselle Bowers, I want you to answer this. 
Did Mademoiselle de Bellefort leave her cabin at all?” 

“No, she did not.” 

“And you yourself?” 

“I stayed with her until early this morning.” 

“You are quite sure of that.” 

“Absolutely sure.” 

“Thank you, Mademoiselle Bowers.” 

The nurse went out. The two men looked at each other. I 

Jacqueline de Bellefort was definitely cleared of the 
crime. Who then had shot Linnet Doyle? 


CHAPTER XIII 


Iace said: “Someone pinched the pistol. It wasn’t 
acqueline de Bellefort. Someone knew enough to feel 
hat his crime would be attributed to her. But that some- 
>ne did not know that a hospital nurse was going to give 
i ler morphia and sit up with her all night. Add one thing 
nore. Someone had already attempted to kill Linnet Doyle 
it>y rolling a boulder over the cliff; that someone was not 
acqueline de Bellefort. Who was it?” 

Poirot said: “It will be simpler to say who it could not 
lave been. Neither Monsieur Doyle, Madame Allerton, 
donsieur Tim Allerton, Mademoiselle Van Schuyler nor 
Mademoiselle Bowers could have had anything to do with 
t. They were all within my sight.” 

“H’m,” said Race; “that leaves rather a large field. What 
ibout motive?” 

“That is where I hope Monsieur Doyle may be able to 
lelp us. There have been several incidents—” 

The door opened and Jacqueline de Bellefort entered. 
>he was very pale and she stumbled a little as she walked. 

“I didn’t do it,” she said. Her voice was that of a fright- 
:ned child. “I didn’t do it. Oh, please believe me. Every- 
>ne will think I did it— but I didn’t— I didn’t. It’s— it’s awful. 

wish it hadn’t happened. I might have killed Simon last 
light; I was mad, I think. But I didn’t do the other. . . 

She sat down and burst into tears. 

Poirot patted her on the shoulder. 

165 


Death on the Nile 


1 66 

“There, there. We know that you did not kill Madami 
Doyle. It is proved— yes, proved, mon enfant. It was no 
you.” 

Jackie sat up suddenly, her wet handkerchief clasped ii 
her hand. 

“But who did?” 

“That,” said Poirot, “is just the question we are askin' 
ourselves. You cannot help us there, my child?” 

Jacqueline shook her head. 

“I don’t know ... I can’t imagine. . . . No, I haven’ 
the faintest idea.” She frowned deeply. “No,” she said a 
last. “I can’t think of anyone who wanted her dead,” he 
voice faltered a little, “except me.” 

Race said, “Excuse me a minute— just thought of some 
thing.” He hurried out of the room. 

Jacqueline de Bellefort sat with her head downcast, nerv 
ously twisting her fingers. She broke out suddenly 
“Death’s horrible— horrible! I— I hate the thought of it; 

Poirot said: “Yes. It is not pleasant to think, is it, tha 
now, at this very moment, someone is rejoicing at the sue 
cessful carrying out of his or her plan.” 

“Don’t— don’t!” cried Jackie. “It sounds horrible, tb 
way you put it.” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. “It is true.” 

Jackie said in a low voice: “I— I wanted her dead— am 
she is dead. . . . And, what is worse . . . she died— jus 
like I said.” 

“Yes, Mademoiselle. She was shot through the head.” 

She cried out: “Then I was right, that night at tb 
Cataract Hotel. There was someone listening!” 

“Ah!” Poirot nodded his head. “I wondered if you wouk 
remember that. Yes, it is altogether too much of a coinci 


Death on the Nile 


167 


ence— that Madame Doyle should be killed in just the way 
ou described.” 

Jackie shuddered. 

“That man that night— who can he have been?” 

Poirot was silent for a minute or two, then he said in 
uite a different tone of voice, “You are sure it was a man, 
Mademoiselle?” 

Jackie looked at him in surprise. 

“Yes, of course. At least—” 


“Well, Mademoiselle?” 

She frowned, half closing her eyes in an effort to re- 
member. She said slowly, “I thought it was a man. . . .” 

“But now you are not so sure?” 

Jackie said slowly: “No, I can’t be certain. I just as- 
umed it was a man— but it was really just a— a figure— a 
hadow. . . .” 

She paused and then, as Poirot did not speak, she asked: 
; You think it must have been a woman? But surely none 
>f the women on this boat can have wanted to kill Linnet?” 
Poirot merely moved his head from side to side. 

The door opened and Bessner appeared. 

“Will you come and speak with Mr. Doyle, please, 
Monsieur Poirot. He would like to see you.” 

Jackie sprang up. She caught Bessner by the arm. 

“How is he? Is he— all right?” 

“Naturally he is not all right,” replied Dr. Bessner re- 
>roachfully. “The bone is fractured, you understand.” 

“But he’s not going to die?” cried Jackie. 

“Ach, who said anything about dying? We will get him 
o civilization and there we will have an X-ray and proper 
reatment.” 

“Oh!” The girl’s hands came together in a convulsive 




1 68 


Death on the Nile 


pressure. She sank down again on a chair. 

Poirot stepped out onto the deck with the doctor ant 
at that moment Race joined them. They went up to thi 
promenade deck and along to Bessner’s cabin. 

Simon Doyle was lying propped with cushions and pil 
lows, an improvised cage over his leg. His face was ghastl) 
in colour, the ravages of pain with shock on top of it. Bu; 
the predominant expression on his face was bewildermeni 
—the sick bewilderment of a child. 

He muttered: “Please come in. The doctor’s told me- 
told me— about Linnet. ... I can’t believe it. I simply 
can’t believe it’s true.” 

“I know. It’s a bad knock,” said Race. 

Simon stammered: “You know— Jackie didn’t do it. I’rr 
certain Jackie didn’t do it! It looks black against her, ]! 
daresay, but she didn’t do it. She— she was a bit tight last 
night, and all worked up, and that’s why she went for me, 
But she wouldn’t— she wouldn’t do murder . . . not cold- 
blooded murder. . . .” 

Poirot said gently: “Do not distress yourself. Monsieur 
Doyle. Whoever shot your wife, it was not Mademoiselle 
de Bellefort.” 

Simon looked at him doubtfully. 

“Is that on the square?” 

“But since it was not Mademoiselle de Bellefort,” con- 
tinued Poirot, “can you give us any idea of who it might 
have been?” 

Simon shook his head. The look of bewilderment in- 
creased. 

“It’s crazy— impossible. Apart from Jackie nobody could 
have wanted to do her in.” 

“Reflect, Monsieur Doyle. Has she no enemies? Is there 


Death on the Nile 


169 


0 one who has a grudge against her?” 

Again Simon shook his head with the same hopeless 
esture. 

“It sounds absolutely fantastic. There’s Windlesham, of 
ourse. She more or less chucked him to marry me— but I 
m’t see a polite stick like Windlesham committing mur- 
er, and anyway he’s miles away. Same thing with old Sir 
ieorge Wode. He’d got a down on Linnet over the house 
•disliked the way she was pulling it about; but he’s miles 
way in London, and anyway to think of murder in such 
connection would be fantastic.” 

“Listen, Monsieur Doyle.” Poirot spoke very earnestly. 
On the first day we came on board the Karnak I was 
npressed by a little conversation which I had with Madame 
our wife. She was very upset— very distraught. She said 
•mark this well— that everybody hated her. She said she 
fit afraid— unsafe— as though everyone round her were 
n enemy.” 

“She was pretty upset at finding Jackie aboard. So was 
” said Simon. 

“That is true, but it does not quite explain those words. 
Vhen she said she was surrounded by enemies, she was 
Imost certainly exaggerating, but all the same she did 
lean more than one person.” 

“You may be right there,” admitted Simon. “I think I 
an explain that. It was a name in the passenger list that 
pset her.” 

“A name in the passenger list? What name?” 

“Well, you see, she didn’t actually tell me. As a matter 
f fact I wasn’t even listening very carefully. I was going 
ver the Jacqueline business in my mind. As far as I re- 
lember, Linnet said something about doing people down 


Death on the Nile 


170 

in business, and that it made her uncomfortable to mee 
anyone who had a grudge against her family. You see, al 
though I don’t really know the family history very well 
I gather that Linnet’s mother was a millionaire’s daughtei 
Her father was only just ordinary plain wealthy, but afte 
his marriage he naturally began playing the markets 0 
whatever you call it. And as a result of that, of course 
several people got it in the neck. You know, affluence on 
day, the gutter the next. Well, I gather there was someon 
on board whose father had got up against Linnet’s fathe 
and taken a pretty hard knock. I remember Linnet saying 
‘It’s pretty awful when people hate you without ever 
knowing you.’ ” 

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “That would explaii 
what she said to me. For the first time she was feeling thf 
burden of her inheritance and not its advantages. You an 
quite sure, Monsieur Doyle, that she did not mention thi: 
man’s name?” 

Simon shook his head ruefully. 

“I didn’t really pay much attention. Just said: ‘Oh, no- 
body minds what happened to their fathers nowadays 
Life goes too fast for that.’ Something of that kind.” 

Bessner said drily: “Ach, but I can have a guess. There 
is certainly a young man with a grievance on board.” 

“You mean Ferguson?” asked Poirot. 

“Yes. He spoke against Mrs. Doyle once or twice. 1 
myself have heard him.” 

“What can we do to find out?” asked Simon. 

Poirot replied: “Colonel Race and I must interview all 
the passengers. Until we have got their stories it would be 
unwise to form theories. Then there is the maid. We ought 
to interview her first of all. It would, perhaps, be as well 


Death on the Nile 17 1 

r we did that here. Monsieur Doyle’s presence might be 
elpful.” 

“Yes, that’s a good idea,” said Simon. 

“Had she been with Mrs. Doyle long?” 

“Just a couple of months, that’s all.” 

“Only a couple of months! ” exclaimed Poirot. 

“Why, you don’t think—” 

“Had Madame any valuable jewellery?” 

“There were her pearls,” said Simon. “She once told me 
hey were worth forty or fifty thousand.” He shivered. 
My God, do you think those damned pearls—” 

“Robbery is a possible motive,” said Poirot. “All the 
ime it seems hardly credible. . . . Well, we shall see. Let 
Is have the maid here.” 

Louise Bourget was that same vivacious Latin brunette 
l /hom Poirot had seen one day and noticed. 

She was anything but vivacious now. She had been cry- 
ig and looked frightened. Yet there was a kind of sharp 
unning apparent in her face which did not prepossess the 
wo men favourably toward her. 

“You are Louise Bourget?” 

“Yes, Monsieur.” 

“When did you last see Madame Doyle alive?” 

“Last night, Monsieur. I wait in her cabin to undress 
er.” 

“What time was that?” 

“It was some time after eleven, Monsieur. I cannot say 
xactly when. I undress Madame and put her to bed, and 
hen I leave.” 

“How long did all that take?” 

“Ten minutes, Monsieur. Madame was tired. She told me 
0 put the lights out when I went.” 


172 


Death on the Nile 


“And when you had left her, what did you do?” 

“I went to my own cabin, Monsieur, on the deck below.” 

“And you heard or saw nothing more that can help us?” 

“How could I, Monsieur?” 

“That, Mademoiselle, is for you to say, not for us,” 
Hercule Poirot retorted. 

She stole a sideways glance at him. 

“But, Monsieur, I was nowhere near. . . . What could 1 
have seen or heard? I was on the deck below. My cabin it 
was on the other side of the boat, even. It is impossible 
that I should have heard anything. Naturally, if I had been 
unable to sleep, if I had mounted the stairs, then perhaps 1 
might have seen this assassin, this monster, enter or leave 
Madame’s cabin, but as it is—” 

She threw out her hands appealingly to Simon. 

“Monsieur, I implore you— you see how it is? What can 
I say?” 

“My good girl,” said Simon harshly, “don’t be a fool 
Nobody thinks you saw or heard anything. You’ll be quite 
all right. I’ll look after you. Nobody’s accusing you of 
anything.” 

Louise murmured, “Monsieur is very good,” and 
dropped her eyelids modestly. 

“We take it, then, that you saw and heard nothing?” 
asked Race impatiently. 

“That is what I said, Monsieur.” 

“And you know of no one who had a grudge against 
your mistress?” 

To the surprise of her listeners Louise nodded her head 
vigorously. 

“Oh, yes. That I do know. To that question I can 
answer Yes most emphatically.” 


Death on the Nile 


i73 


Poirot said, “You mean Mademoiselle de Belief ort?” 

“She, certainly. But it is not of her I speak. There was 
omeone else on this boat who disliked Madame, who was 
'ery angry because of the way Madame had injured him.” 

“Good Lord!” Simon exclaimed. “What’s all this?” 

Louise went on, still emphatically nodding her head with 
he utmost vigor. 

“Yes, yes, yes, it is as I say! It concerns the former maid 
>f Madame— my predecessor. There was a man, one of the 
ngineers on this boat, who wanted her to marry him. And 
ny predecessor, Marie her name was, she would have done 
o. But Madame Doyle, she made inquiries and she discov- 
red that this Fleetwood already he had a wife— a wife of 
:olour you understand, a wife of this country. She had gone 
>ack to her own people, but he was still married to her, you 
mderstand. And so Madame she told all this to Marie, and 
darie she was very unhappy and she would not see Fleet- 
vood any more. And this Fleetwood, he was infuriated, 
nd when he found out that this Madame Doyle had form- 
rly been Mademoiselle Linnet Ridgeway he tells me that 
le would like to kill her! Her interference ruined his life, 
te said.” 

Louise paused triumphantly. 

“This is interesting,” said Race. 

Poirot turned to Simon. 

“Had you any idea of this?” 

“None whatever,” Simon replied with patent sincerity. 
I doubt if Linnet even knew the man was on the boat, 
ihe had probably forgotten all about the incident.” 

He turned sharply to the maid. 

“Did you say anything to A-lrs. Doyle about this?” 

“No, Monsieur, of course not.” 


174 Death on the Nile 

Poirot asked, “Do you know anything about your mis 
tress’s pearls?” 

“Her pearls?” Louise’s eyes opened very wide. “She wa 
wearing them last night.” 

“You saw them when she came to bed?” 

“Yes, Monsieur.” 

“Where did she put them?” 

“On the table by the side as always.” 

“That is where you last saw them?” 

“Yes, sir.” 

“Did you see them there this morning?” 

A startled look came into the girl’s face. 

“Mon Dieu! I did not even look. I come up to the bed 
I see— I see Madame; and then I cry out and rush out o 
the door, and I faint.” 

Hercule Poirot nodded his head. 

“You did not look. But I, I have the eyes which notice 
and there were no pearls on the table beside the bed thi 
morning.” 


CHAPTER XIV 


1 


78 


tIercule Poirot’s observation had not been at fault. 
There were no pearls on the table by Linnet Doyle’s bed. 

Louise Bourget was bidden to make a search among 
linnet’s belongings. According to her, all was in order. 
Dnly the pearls had disappeared. 

As they emerged from the cabin a steward was waiting 

0 tell them that breakfast had been served in the smoking- 
•oom. 

As they passed along the deck, Race paused to look over 
he rail. 

“Aha! I see you have had an idea, my friend.” 

“Yes. It suddenly came to me, when Fanthorp men- 
ioned thinking he had heard a splash, that I too had been 
iwakened sometime last night by a splash. It’s perfectly 
>ossible that, after the murder, the murderer threw the pis- 

01 overboard.” 

Poirot said slowly, “You really think that is possible, 
ny friend?” 

Race shrugged his shoulders. 

“It’s a suggestion. After all, the pistol wasn’t anywhere 
n the cabin. First thing I looked for.” 

“All the same,” said Poirot, “it is incredible that it 
hould have been thrown overboard.” 

Race asked, “Where is it then?” 

Poirot replied thoughtfully, “If it is not in Madame 
)oyle’s cabin, there is, logically, only one other place 

i75 


17 6 Death on the Nile 

where it could be.” 

“Where’s that?” 

“In Mademoiselle de Bellefort’s cabin.” 

Race said thoughtfully: “Yes. I see—” 

He stopped suddenly. 

“She’s out of her cabin. Shall we go and have a look 
now?” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“No, my friend, that would be precipitate. It may not 
yet have been put there.” 

“What about an immediate search of the whole boat?” 

“That way we should show our hand. We must work 
with great care. It is very delicate, our position, at the 
moment. Let us discuss the situation as we eat.” 

Race agreed. They went into the smoking-room. 

“Well,” said Race as he poured himself out a cup of 
coffee, “we’ve got two definite leads. There’s the disap- 
pearance of the pearls. And there’s the man Fleetwood. As 
regards the pearls, robbery seems indicated, but— I don’t 
know whether you’ll agree with me—” 

Poirot said quickly, “But it was an odd moment tc 
choose?” 

“Exactly. To steal the pearls at such a moment invites a 
close search of everybody on board. How then could the 
thief hope to get away with his booty?” 

“He might have gone ashore and dumped it.” 

“The company always has a watchman on the bank.” 

“Then that is not feasible. Was the murder committed tc 
divert attention from the robbery? No, that does not make 
sense; it is profoundly unsatisfactory. But supposing that 
Madame Doyle woke up and caught the thief in the act?’ 

“And therefore the thief shot her? But she was shot 


Death on the Nile 


177 


vhilst she slept.” 

“So that too does not make sense. ... You know, I 
lave a little idea about those pearls— and yet— no— it is im- 
)ossible. Because if my idea was right the pearls would not 
lave disappeared. Tell me, what did you think of the 
Inaid? ” 

“I wondered,” said Race slowly, “if she knew more than 
he said.” 

1 “Ah, you too had that impression.” 

“Definitely not a nice girl,” said Race. 

Hercule Poirot nodded. “Yes, I would not trust her, 
hat one.” 

“You think she had something to do with the murder?” 

“No, I would not say that.” 

“With the theft of the pearls, then?” 

“That is more probable. She had only been with Madame 
Doyle a very short time. She may be a member of a gang 
hat specializes in jewel robberies. In such a case there is 
iften a maid with excellent references. Unfortunately we 
re not in a position to seek information on these points. 
Ynd yet that explanation does not quite satisfy me. . . . 
Those pearls— ah, sacre, my little idea ought to be right. 
Ynd yet nobody would be so imbecile—” He broke off. 

I “What about the man Fleetwood?” 

“We must question him. It may be that we have there 
he solution. If Louise Bourget’s story is true, he had a 
lefinite motive for revenge. He could have overheard the 
cene between Jacqueline and Monsieur Doyle, and when 
hey have left the saloon he could have darted in and se- 
cured the gun. Yes, it is all quite possible. And that letter 

scrawled in blood. That, too, would accord with a 
imple, rather crude nature.” 


Death on the Nile 


178 

“In fact, he’s just the person we are looking for?” 

“Yes— only— ” Poirot rubbed his nose. He said with i 
slight grimace: “See you, I recognize my own weaknesses 
It has been said of me that I like to make a case difficult 
This solution that you put to me— it is too simple, too easy 
I cannot feel that it really happened. And yet, that ma) 
be sheer prejudice on my part.” 

“Well, we’d better have the fellow here.” 

Race rang the bell and gave the order. Then he asked 
“Any other— possibilities? ” 

“Plenty, my friend. There is, for example, the Ameri 
can trustee.” 

“Pennington?” 

“Yes, Pennington. There was a curious little scene ii 
here the other day.” He narrated the happenings to Race 
“You see— it is significant. Madame, she wanted to read al 
the papers before signing. So he makes the excuse of an 
other day. And then, the husband, he makes a very sig 
nificant remark.” 

“What was that?” 

“He says— 1 never read anything. I sign where I am tol( 
to sign.’ You perceive the significance of that. Penning 
ton did. I saw it in his eye. He looked at Doyle as thougl 
an entirely new idea had come into his head. Just imagine 
my friend, that you have been left trustee to the daughte 
of an intensely wealthy man. You use, perhaps, that monej 
to speculate with. I know it is so in all detective novels- 
but you read of it too in the newspapers. It happens, mj 
friend, it happens .” 

“I don’t dispute it,” said Race. 

“There is, perhaps, still time to make good by speculating 
wildly. Your ward is not yet of age. And then— she mar 


Death on the Nile 


179 


r;s! The control passes from your hands into hers at a 
ioment’s notice! A disaster! But there is still a chance, 
fie is on a honeymoon. She will perhaps be careless about 
hsiness. A casual paper, slipped in among others, signed 
•\ithout reading . . . But Linnet Doyle was not like that. 
1 oneymoon or no honeymoon, she was a business woman, 
md then her husband makes a remark, and a new idea 
omes to that desperate man who is seeking a way out from 
nin. If Linnet Doyle were to die, her fortune would pass 
t her husband— and he would be easy to deal with; he 
muld be a child in the hands of an astute man like Andrew 
bnnington. Mon cher Colonel, I tell you I saw the thought 
jiss through Andrew Pennington’s head. ‘If only it were 
loyle I had got to deal with . . .’ That is what he was 
t inking.” 

“Quite possible, I daresay,” said Race drily, “but you’ve 
d evidence.” 
i “Alas, no.” 

“Then there’s young Ferguson,” said Race. “He talks 
l tterly enough. Not that I go by talk. Still, he might be 
ne fellow whose father was ruined by old Ridgeway. It’s 
; little far-fetched but it’s possible. People do brood over 
Vgone wrongs sometimes.” 

He paused a minute and then said, “And there’s my 
illow.” 

“Yes, there is ‘your fellow’ as you call him.” 

“He’s a killer,” said Race. “We know that. On the other 
land, I can’t see any way in which he could have come up 
gainst Linnet Doyle. Their orbits don’t touch.” 

Poirot said slowly, “Unless, accidentally, she had be- 
came possessed of evidence showing his identity.” 

“That’s possible, but it seems highly unlikely.” There 


180 Death on the Nile 

was a knock at the door. “Ah, here’s our would-be biga 
mist.” 

Fleetwood was a big, truculent looking man. He looke 
suspiciously from one to the other of them as he enterei 
the room. Poirot recognized him as the man he had see: 
talking to Louise Bourget. 

Fleetwood asked suspiciously, “You wanted to see me? 

“We did,” said Race. “You probably know that a mur 
der was committed on this boat last night?” 

Fleetwood nodded. 

“And I believe it is true that you had reason to fee 
anger against the woman who was killed.” 

A look of alarm sprang up in Fleetwood’s eyes. 

“Who told you that?” 

“You considered that Mrs. Doyle had interfered be 
tween you and a young woman.” 

“I know who told you that— that lying French hussy 
She’s a liar through and through, that girl.” 

“But this particular story happens to be true.” 

“It’s a dirty lie!” 

“You say that, although you don’t know what it is yet.’ i 

The shot told. The man flushed and gulped. 

“It is true, is it not, that you were going to marry th( 
girl Marie, and that she broke it off when she discoverec 
that you were a married man already?” 

“What business was it of hers?” 

“You mean, what business was it of Mrs. Doyle’s? Well, 
you know, bigamy is bigamy.” 

“It wasn’t like that. I married one of the locals out here. 
It didn’t answer. She went back to her people. I’ve not 
seen her for half a dozen years.” 

“Still you were married to her.” 


Death on the Nile 


i 


The man was silent. Race went on: 

“Mrs. Doyle, or Miss Ridgeway as she then was, found 
>ut all this?” 

“Yes, she did, curse her! Nosing about where no one 
:ver asked her to. I’d have treated Marie right. I’d have 
lone anything for her. And she’d never have known about 
he other, if it hadn’t been for that meddlesome young lady 
>f hers. Yes, I’ll say it, I did have a grudge against the lady, 
md I felt bitter about it when I saw her on this boat, all 
Iressed up in pearls and diamonds and lording it all over 
he place, with never a thought that she’d broken up a 
nan’s life for him! I felt bitter all right, but if you think 
’m a dirty murderer— if you think I went and shot her 
vith a gun, well, that’s a damned lie! I never touched her. 
\nd that’s God’s truth.” 

He stopped. The sweat was rolling down his face. 

“Where were you last night between the hours of twelve 
ind two?” 

“In my bunk asleep— and my mate will tell you so.” 

“We shall see,” said Race. He dismissed him with a curt 
tod. “That’ll do.” 

“ Eh bien inquired Poirot as the door closed behind 
"leetwood. 

Race shrugged his shoulders. “He tells quite a straight 
;tory. He’s nervous, of course, but not unduly so. We’ll 
lave to investigate his alibi— though I don’t suppose it will 
ie decisive. His mate was probably asleep, and this fellow 
:ould have slipped in and out if he wanted to. It depends 
vhether anyone else saw him.” 

“Yes, one must inquire as to that.” 

“The next thing, I think,” said Race, “is whether anyone 
leard anything which might give us a clue to the time of 


Death on the Nile 


the crime. Bessner places it as having occurred betweei 
twelve and two. It seems reasonable to hope that someon ] 
among the passengers may have heard the shot— even i 
they did not recognize it for what it was. I didn’t hea 
anything of the kind myself. What about you?” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“Me, I slept absolutely like the log. I heard nothing- 
but nothing at all. I might have been drugged, I slept s< 
soundly.” 

“A pity,” said Race. “Well, let’s hope we have a bit o 
luck with the people who have cabins on the starboarc , 
side. Fanthorp we’ve done. The Allertons come next. I’l , 
send the steward to fetch them.” , 

Mrs. Allerton came in briskly. She was wearing a sof , 
grey striped silk dress. Her face looked distressed. 

“It’s too horrible,” she said as she accepted the chair tha 
Poirot placed for her. “I can hardly believe it. That lovelj i 
creature, with everything to live for— dead. I almost feel j 
can’t believe it.” 

“I know how you feel, Madame,” said Poirot sympa- 
thetically. 

“I’m glad you are on board,” said Mrs. Allerton simply 
“You’ll be able to find out who did it. I’m so glad it isn’i 
that poor tragic girl.” 

“You mean Mademoiselle de Belief ort. Who told yon 
she did not do it?” 

“Cornelia Robson,” replied Mrs. Allerton, with a faint 
smile. “You know, she’s simply thrilled by it all. It’s 
probably the only exciting thing that has ever happened 
to her, and probably the only exciting thing that ever wil! 
happen to her. But she’s so nice that she’s terribly ashamed 
of enjoying it. She thinks it’s awful of her.” 


Death on the Nile 183 

Mrs. Allerton gave a look at Poirot and then added: 
But I mustn’t chatter. You want to ask me questions.” 

“If you please. You went to bed at what time, Madame?” 

“Just after half past ten.” 

“And you went to sleep at once?” 

“Yes. I was sleepy.” 

“And did you hear anything— anything at all— during 
te night?” 

Mrs. Allerton wrinkled her brows. 

“Yes, I think I heard a splash and someone running— or 
/as it the other way about? I’m rather hazy. I just had a 
ague idea that someone had fallen overboard at sea— a 
ream, you know— and then I woke up and listened, but it 
/as all quite quiet.” 

“Do you know what time that was?” 

“No, I’m afraid I don’t. But I don’t think it was very 
mg after I went to sleep. I mean it was within the first 
our or so.” 

“Alas, Madame, that is not very definite.” 

“No, I know it isn’t. But it’s no good my trying to guess, 
; it, when I haven’t really the vaguest idea?” 

“And that is all you can tell us, Madame?” 

“I’m afraid so.” 

“Had you ever actually met Madame Doyle before?” 

“No, Tim had met her. And I’d heard a good deal about 
er— through a cousin of ours, Joanna Southwood, but I’d 
ever spoken to her till we met at Assuan.” 

“I have one other question, Madame, if you will pardon 
ie for asking.” 

Mrs. .Allerton murmured with a faint smile, “I should 
ove to be asked an indiscreet question.” 

“It is this. Did you, or your family, ever suffer any 


Death on the Nile 


184 

financial loss through the operations of Madame Doyle 
father, Melhuish Ridgeway?” 1 

Mrs. Allerton looked thoroughly astonished. 

“Oh, no! The family finances have never suffered e> 
cept by dwindling . . . you know, everything paying le; 
interest than it used to. There’s never been anything melc 
dramatic about our poverty. My husband left very littl ; 
money, but what he left I still have, though it doesn’t yiel 
as much as it used to yield.” 

“I thank you, Madame. Perhaps you will ask your so 
to come to us.” } 

Tim said lightly, when his mother came to him: “Ordes 
over? My turn now! What sort of things did they asf 
you?” 

“Only whether I heard anything last night,” said Mrs 
Allerton. “And unluckily I didn’t hear anything at all. 
can’t think why not. After all, Linnet’s cabin is only on 
away from mine. I should think I’d have been bound t< 
hear the shot. Go along, Tim; they’re waiting for you.” 

To Tim Allerton Poirot repeated his previous question 

Tim answered: “I went to bed early, half past ten o 
so. I read for a bit. Put out my light just after eleven.” 

“Did you hear anything after that?” 

“Heard a man’s voice saying good-night, I think, no 
far away.” 

“That was I saying good-night to Mrs. Doyle,” saic 
Race. 

“Yes. After that I went to sleep. Then, later, I heart 
a kind of hullabaloo going on, somebody calling Fanthorp 
I remember.” 

“Mademoiselle Robson when she ran out from the ob 
servation saloon.” 


Death on the Nile 


185 

“Yes, I suppose that was it. And then a lot of different 
•oices. And then somebody running along the deck. And 
nen a splash. And then I heard old Bessner booming out 
wnething about ‘Careful now’ and ‘Not too quick.’ ” 

“You heard a splash?” 

“Well, something of that kind.” 

“You are sure it was not a shot you heard?” 

“Yes, I suppose it might have been ... I did hear a 
ork pop. Perhaps that was the shot. I may have imagined 
ne splash from connecting the idea of the cork with 
Jquid pouring into a glass. ... I know my foggy idea 
- as that there was some kind of party on, and I wished 
Key’d all go to bed and shut up.” 

“Anything more after that?” 

Tim thought. 

“Only Fanthorp barging round in his cabin next door. I 
bought he’d never get to bed.” 

“And after that?” 

Tim shrugged his shoulders. 

“After that— oblivion.” 

“You heard nothing more?” 

“Nothing whatever.” 

“Thank you, Monsieur Allerton.” 

Tim got up and left the cabin. 


CHAPTER XV 



Race pored thoughtfully over a plan of the prome 
nade deck of the Karnak. 

“Fanthorp, young Allerton, Mrs. Allerton. Then ai 
empty cabin— Simon Doyle’s. Now who’s on the other sid 
of Mrs. Doyle’s? The old American dame. If anyone hear< 
anything, she should have done. If she’s up we’d bette 
have her along.” 

Miss Van Schuyler entered the room. She looked evei 
older and yellower than usual this morning. Her smal 
dark eyes had an air of venomous displeasure in them. 

Race rose and bowed. 

“We’re very sorry to trouble you, Miss Van Schuyler 1 
It’s very good of you. Please sit down.” 

Miss Van Schuyler said sharply: “I dislike being mixec 
up in this. I resent it very much. I do not wish to be as 
sociated in any way with this— er— very unpleasant affair.’ 

“Quite— quite. I was just saying to Monsieur Poirot tha 
the sooner we took your statement the better, as then yoi 
need have no further trouble.” 

Miss Van Schuyler looked at Poirot with something ap- 
proaching favour. 

“I’m glad you both realize my feelings. I am not accus- 
tomed to anything of this kind.” 

Poirot said soothingly: “Precisely, Mademoiselle. That 
is why we wish to free you from unpleasantness as quickly 
as possible. Now you went to bed last night— at wha 

1 86 


Death on the Nile 


187 


ime?” 

“Ten o’clock is my usual time. Last night I was rather 
iter, as Cornelia Robson, very inconsiderately, kept me 
waiting.” 

“ Tres bien, Mademoiselle. Now what did you hear after 
'ou had retired?” 

Miss Van Schuyler said: “I sleep very lightly.” 

“A merveille! That is very fortunate for us.” 

“I was awakened by that rather flashy young woman, 
drs. Doyle’s maid, who said, ‘’Bonne mat , Madame ’ in what 
cannot but think an unnecessarily loud voice.” 

“And after that?” 

“I went to sleep again. I woke up thinking someone 
vas in my cabin, but I realized that it was someone in the 
tfabin next door.” 

“In Madame Doyle’s cabin?” 

“Yes. Then I heard someone outside on the deck and 
hen a splash.” 

“You have no idea what time this was?” 

“I can tell you the time exactly. It was ten minutes past 
me. 

“You are sure of that?” 

“Yes. I looked at my little clock that stands by my bed.” 

“You did not hear a shot?” 

“No, nothing of the kind.” 

“But it might possibly have been a shot that awakened 
r ou? ” 

Miss Van Schuyler considered the question, her toad- 
ike head on one side. 

“It might,” she admitted rather grudgingly, 
j “And you have no idea what caused the splash you 
leard?” 


1 88 


Death on the Nile 


“Not at all— I know perfectly.” 

Colonel Race sat up alertly. 

“You know?” 

“Certainly. I did not like this sound of prowling around. 
I got up and went to the door of my cabin. Miss Otter- 
bourne was leaning over the side. She had just dropped 
something into the water.” 

“Miss Otterbourne? ” Race sounded really surprised. 

“Yes.” 

“You are quite sure it was Miss Otterbourne?” 

“I saw her face distinctly.” 

“She did not see you?” 

“I do not think so.” 

Poirot leant forward. 

“And what did her face look like, Mademoiselle?” 

“She was in a condition of considerable emotion.” 

Race and Poirot exchanged a quick glance. 

“And then?” Race prompted. 

“Miss Otterbourne went away round the stern of the 
boat and I returned to bed.” 

There was a knock at the door and the Manager en- 
tered. He carried in his hand a dripping bundle. 

“We’ve got it, Colonel.” 

Race took the package. He unwrapped fold after fold 
of sodden velvet. Out of it fell a coarse handkerchief, 
faintly stained with pink, wrapped round a small pearl- 
handled pistol. 

Race gave Poirot a glance of slightly malicious triumph. 

“You see,” he said, “my idea was right. It was thrown 
overboard.” 

He held the pistol out on the palm of his hand. 

“What do you say, Monsieur Poirot? Is this the pistol 


Death on the Nile 


189 


you saw at the Cataract Hotel that night?” 

Poirot examined it carefully; then he said quietly: “Yes 
—that is it. There is the ornamental work on it— and the 
initials J. B. It is an article de luxe, a very feminine pro- 
duction, but it is none the less a lethal weapon.” 

“Twenty-two,” murmured Race. He took out the clip. 
; ‘Two bullets fired. Yes, there doesn’t seem much doubt 
ibout it.” 

Miss Van Schuyler coughed significantly. 

“And what about my stole?” she demanded. 

“Your stole, Mademoiselle?” 

“Yes, that is my velvet stole you have here.” 

Race picked up the dripping folds of material. 

“This is yours, Miss Van Schuyler?” 

“Certainly it’s mine!” the old lady snapped. “I missed 
it last night. I was asking everyone if they’d seen it.” 

Poirot questioned Race with a glance, and the latter gave 
1 slight nod of assent. 

“Where did you see it last, Miss Van Schuyler?” 

“I had it in the saloon yesterday evening. When I came 
:o go to bed I could not find it anywhere.” 

Race said quietly, “You realize what it’s been used for?” 
He spread it out, indicating with a finger the scorching 
md several small holes. “The murderer wrapped it round 
:he pistol to deaden the noise of the shot.” 

“Impertinence!” snapped Miss Van Schuyler. The col- 
our rose in her wizened cheeks. 

Race said, “I shall be glad, Miss Van Schuyler, if you 
vill tell me the extent of your previous acquaintance with 
Mrs. Doyle.” 

“There was no previous acquaintance.” 

“But you knew of her?” 


Death on the Nile 


190 

“I knew who she was, of course.” 

“But your families were not acquainted?” 

“As a family we have always prided ourselves on being 
exclusive, Colonel Race. My dear mother would never have 
dreamed of calling upon any of the Hartz family, who, 
outside their wealth, were nobodies.” 

“That is all you have to say. Miss Van Schuyler?” 

“I have nothing to add to what I have told you. Linnet 
Ridgeway was brought up in England and I never saw her 
till I came aboard this boat.” 

She rose. Poirot opened the door for her and she marched 
out. 

The eyes of the two men met. 

“That’s her story,” said Race, “and she’s going to stick 
to it! It may be true. I don’t know. But— Rosalie Otter- 
bourne? I hadn’t expected that.” 

Poirot shook his head in a perplexed manner. Then he 
brought down his hand on the table with a sudden bang. 

“But it does not make sense,” he cried. u Nom (Tun nom 
(Tun nom! It does not make sense.” 

Race looked at him. 

“What do you mean exactly?” 

“I mean that up to a point it is all the clear sailing. Some- 
one wished to kill Linnet Doyle. Someone overheard the 
scene in the saloon last night. Someone sneaked in there 
and retrieved the pistol— Jacqueline de Bellefort’s pistol, 
remember. Somebody shot Linnet Doyle with that pistol 
and wrote the letter J on the wall. . . . All so clear, is it 
not? All pointing to Jacqueline de Bellefort as the mur- 
deress. And then what does the murderer do. Leave the 
pistol— the damning pistol— Jacqueline de Bellefort’s pis- 
tol, for everyone to find? No, he— or she— throws the pis- 


Death on the Nile 


191 

loL, that particularly damning bit of evidence, overboard. 
Why, my friend, why?” 

Race shook his head. “It’s odd.” 

“It is more than odd— it is impossible!” 

“Not impossible, since it happened!” 

“I do not mean that. I mean that the sequence of events 
is impossible. Something is wrong.” 


CHAPTER XVI 


fJT 

SL 


II 

-Jfi 


Colonel Race glanced curiously at his colleague. He 
respected— he had reason to respect— the brain of Hercule 
Poirot. Yet for the moment he did not follow the other’s 
process of thought. He asked no question, however. He 
seldom did ask questions. He proceeded straightforwardly 
with the matter in hand. 

“What’s the next thing to be done? Question the Otter- 
bourne girl?” 

“Yes, that may advance us a little.” 

Rosalie Otterbourne entered ungraciously. She did not 
look nervous or frightened in any way— merely unwilling 
and sulky. 

“Well,” she asked, “what is it?” 

Race was the spokesman. 

“We’re investigating Mrs. Doyle’s death,” he explained. 

Rosalie nodded. 

“Will you tell me what you did last night? ” 

Rosalie reflected a minute. 

“Mother and I went to bed early— before eleven. We 
didn’t hear anything in particular, except a bit of fuss out- 
side Dr. Bessner’s cabin. I heard the old man’s German 
voice booming away. Of course I didn’t know what it was 
all about till this morning.” 

“You didn’t hear a shot?” 

“No.” 


“Did you leave your cabin at all last night? ” 

192 


Death on the Nile 


i93 


“No.” 

“You are quite sure of that?” 

Rosalie stared at him. 

“What do you mean? Of course I’m sure of it.” 

“You did not, for instance, go round to the starboard 
side of the boat and throw something overboard?” 

The colour rose in her face. 

“Is there any rule against throwing things overboard?” 
“No, of course not. Then you did?” 

“No, I didn’t. I never left my cabin, I tell you.” 

“Then if anyone says that they saw you—” 

She interrupted him. “Who says they saw me?” 

“Miss Van Schuyler.” 

“Miss Van Schuyler?” She sounded genuinely aston- 
ished. 

“Yes. Miss Van Schuyler says she looked out of her 
cabin and saw you throw something over the side.” 

Rosalie said clearly, “That’s a damned lie.” Then, as 
though struck by a sudden thought, she asked, “What time 
was this?” 

It was Poirot who answered. 

“It was ten minutes past one, Mademoiselle.” 

She nodded her head thoughtfully. “Did she see any- 
thing else? ” 

Poirot looked at her curiously. He stroked his chin. 
“See— no,” he replied, “but she heard something.” 

“What did she hear?” 

“Someone moving about in Madame Doyle’s cabin.” 

“I see,” muttered Rosalie. 

She was pale now— deadly pale. 

“And you persist in saying that you threw nothing over- 
board, Mademoiselle?” 


i 9 4 


Death on the Nile 


“What on earth should I run about throwing things 
overboard for in the middle of the night? ” 

“There might be a reason— an innocent reason.” 

“Innocent?” repeated the girl sharply. 

“That’s what I said. You see, Mademoiselle, something 
•was thrown overboard last night— something that was not 
innocent.” 

Race silently held out the bundle of stained velvet, open- 
ing it to display its contents. 

Rosalie Otterbourne shrank back. “Was that— what— she 
was killed with?” 

“Yes, Mademoiselle.” 

“And you think that I— I did it? What utter nonsense! 
Why on earth should I want to kill Linnet Doyle? I don’t 
even know her!” 

She laughed and stood up scornfully. “The whole thing 
is too ridiculous.” 

“Remember, Miss Otterbourne,” said Race, “that Miss 
Van Schuyler is prepared to swear she saw your face quite 
clearly in the moonlight.” 

Rosalie laughed again. “That old cat? She’s probably 
half blind anyway. It wasn’t me she saw.” She paused. 
“Can I go now?” 

Race nodded and Rosalie Otterbourne left the room. 

The eyes of the two men met. Race lighted a cigarette. 

“Well, that’s that. Flat contradiction. Which of ’em do 
we believe?” 

Poirot shook his head. “I have a little idea that neither 
of them was being quite frank.” 

“That’s the worst of our job,” said Race despondently. 
“So many people keep back the truth for positively futile 
reasons. What’s our next move? Get on with the question- 


Death on the Nile 


195 


ing of the passengers?” 

“I think so. It is always well to proceed with order and 
method.” 

Race nodded. 

Mrs. Otterbourne, dressed in floating batik material, suc- 
ceeded her daughter. She corroborated Rosalie’s statement 
that they had both gone to bed before eleven o’clock. She 
herself had heard nothing of interest during the night. She 
could not say whether Rosalie had left their cabin or not. 
On the subject of the crime she was inclined to hold forth. 

“The crime passionnel!” she exclaimed. “The primitive 
instinct— to kill! So closely allied to the sex instinct. That 
girl, Jacqueline, half Latin, hot-blooded, obeying the deep- 
est instincts of her being, stealing forth, revolver in hand—” 

“But Jacqueline de Bellefort did not shoot Madame 
Doyle. That we know for certain. It is proved,” explained 
Poirot. 

“Her husband, then,” said Mrs. Otterbourne, rallying 
from the blow. “The blood lust and the sex instinct— a 
sexual crime. There are many well-known instances.” 

“Mr. Doyle was shot through the leg and he was quite 
unable to move— the bone was fractured,” explained Colonel 
Race. “He spent the night with Dr. Bessner.” 

Mrs. Otterbourne was even more disappointed. She 
searched her mind hopefully. 

“Of course!” she said. “How foolish of me! Miss 
Bowers!” 

“Miss Bowers?” 

“Yes. Naturally. It’s so clear psychologically. Repres- 
sion! The repressed virgin! Maddened by the sight of these 
two— a young husband and wife passionately in love with 
each other. Of course it was her! She’s just the type— sexu- 


196 Death on the Nile 

ally unattractive, innately respectable. In my book, The 
Barren Vine — ” 

Colonel Race interposed tactfully: “Your suggestions 
have been most helpful, Mrs. Otterbourne. We must get 
on with our job now. Thank you so much.” 

He escorted her gallantly to the door and came back 
wiping his brow. 

“What a poisonous woman! Whew! Why didn’t some- 
body murder her?’’'' 

“It may yet happen,” Poirot consoled him. 

“There might be some sense in that. Whom have we 
got left? Pennington— we’ll keep him for the end, I think. 
Richetti— Ferguson.” 

Signor Richetti was very voluble, very agitated. 

“But what a horror, what an infamy— a woman so young 
and so beautiful— indeed an inhuman crime!” 

Signor Richetti’s hands flew expressively up in the air. 

His answers were prompt. He had gone to bed early- 
very early. In fact immediately after dinner. He had read 
for a while— a very interesting pamphlet lately published— 
Prahistorische Forschung in Kleinasien — throwing an en- 
tirely new light on the painted pottery of the Anatolian 
foothills. 

He had put out his light some time before eleven. No, 
he had not heard any shot. Not any sound like the pop 
of a cork. The only thing he had heard— but that was 
later, in the middle of the night— was a splash, a big splash, 
just near his porthole. 

“Your cabin is on the lower deck, on the starboard side, 
is it not?” 

“Yes, yes, that is so. And I hear the big splash.” His arms 
flew up once more to describe the bigness of the splash. 


Death on the Nile 


197 


“Can you tell me at all what time that was?” 

Signor Richetti reflected. 

“It was one, two, three hours after I go to sleep. Perhaps 
:wo hours.” 

“About ten minutes past one, for instance?” 

“It might very well be, yes. Ah! but what a terrible 
crime— how inhuman. ... So charming a woman. . . .” 

Exit Signor Richetti, still gesticulating freely. 

Race looked at Poirot. Poirot raised his eyebrows ex- 
pressively, then shrugged his shoulders. They passed on 
co Mr. Ferguson. 

Ferguson was difficult. He sprawled insolently in a chair. 

“Grand to-do about this business!” he sneered. “What’s 
it really matter? Lot of superfluous women in the world!” 

Race said coldly, “Can we have an account of your 
movements last night, Mr. Ferguson?” 

“Don’t see why you should, but I don’t mind. I mooched 
around a good bit. Went ashore with Miss Robson. When 
she went back to the boat I mooched around by myself 
for a while. Came back and turned in round about mid- 
night.” 

“Your cabin is on the lower deck, starboard side?” 

“Yes. I’m not up among the nobs.” 

“Did you hear a shot? It might only have sounded like 
the popping of a cork.” 

Ferguson considered. “Yes, I think I did hear something 
like a cork. . . . Can’t remember when— before I went to 
sleep. But there were still a lot of people about then— 
; commotion, running about on the deck above.” 

“That was probably the shot fired by Miss de Bellefort. 
You didn’t hear another?” 

Ferguson shook his head. 


Death on the Nile 


198 

“Nor a splash?” 

“A splash? Yes, I believe I did hear a splash. But there 
was so much row going on I can’t be sure about it.” 

“Did you leave your cabin during the night?” 

Ferguson grinned. “No, I didn’t. And I didn’t partici- 
pate in the good work, worse luck.” 

“Come, come, Mr. Ferguson, don’t behave childishly.” 

The young man reacted angrily. 

“Why shouldn’t I say what I think? I believe in vio- 
lence.” 

“But you don’t practise what you preach?” murmured 
Poirot. “I wonder.” 

He leaned forward. 

“It was the man, Fleetwood, was it not, who told you 
that Linnet Doyle was one of the richest women in Eng- 
land?” 

“What’s Fleetwood got to do with this?” 

“Fleetwood, my friend, had an excellent motive for kill- 
ing Linnet Doyle. He had a special grudge against her.” 

Mr. Ferguson came up out of his seat like a Jack in the 
Box. 

“So that’s your dirty game, is it?” he demanded wrath- 
fully. “Put it on to a poor devil like Fleetwood, who can’t 
defend himself, who’s got no money to hire lawyers. But 
I tell you this— if you try and saddle Fleetwood with this 
business you’ll have me to deal with.” 

“And who exactly are you?” asked Poirot sweetly. 

Mr. Ferguson got rather red. 

“I can stick by my friends anyway,” he said gruffly. 

“Well, Mr. Ferguson, I think that’s all we need for the 
present,” said Race. 

As the door closed behind Ferguson he remarked unex- 


Death on the Nile 


199 


pectedly, “Rather a likable young cub, really.” 

“You don’t think he is the man you are after?” asked 
Poirot. 

“I hardly think so. I suppose he is on board. The in- 
formation was very precise. Oh, well, one job at a time. 
Let’s have a go at Pennington.” 


CHAPTER XVII 


Andrew Pennington displayed all the conventional 
reactions of grief and shock. He was, as usual, carefully 
dressed. He had changed into a black tie. His long clean- 
shaven face bore a bewildered expression. 

“Gentlemen,” he said sadly, “this business has got me 
right down! Little Linnet— why, I remember her as the 
cutest little thing you can imagine. How proud of her 
Melhuish Ridgeway used to be, too! Well, there’s no point 
in going into that. Just tell me what I can do; that’s all I 
ask.” 

Race said, “To begin with, Mr. Pennington, did you 
hear anything last night? ” 

“No, sir, I can’t say I did. I have the cabin right next 
to Dr. Bessner’s, number forty— forty-one, and I heard a 
certain commotion going on in there round about mid- 
night or so. Of course I didn’t know what it was at the 
time.” 

“You heard nothing else? No shots?” 

Andrew Pennington shook his head. 

“Nothing whatever of that kind.” 

“And you went to bed at what time?” 

“Must have been some time after eleven.” 

He leant forward. 

“I don’t suppose it’s news to you to know that there’s 
plenty of rumours going about the boat. That half French 
girl— Jacqueline de Belief ort— there was something fishy 

200 


Death on the Nile 


201 


here, you know. Linnet didn’t tell me anything, but natu- 
ally I wasn’t born blind and deaf. There’d been some 
flair between her and Simon, some time, hadn’t there? 
'Iherchez la ]emme— that’s a pretty good sound rule, and 
should say you wouldn’t have to cherchez far.” 

“You mean that in your belief Jacqueline de Belief ort 
hot Madame Doyle?” Poirot asked. 

“That’s what it looks like to me. Of course I don’t know 
nything. . . 

“Unfortunately we do know something!” 

“Eh?” Mr. Pennington looked startled. 

“We know that it is quite impossible for Mademoiselle 
le Bellefort to have shot Madame Doyle.” 

He explained carefully the circumstances. Pennington 
eemed reluctant to accept them. 

“I agree it looks all right on the face of it— but this hos- 
)ital nurse woman, I’ll bet she didn’t stay awake all night. 
Jhe dozed off and the girl slipped out and in again.” 

“Hardly likely, Monsieur Pennington. She had adminis- 
ered a strong opiate, remember. And anyway a nurse is in 
he habit of sleeping lightly and waking when her patient 
vakes.” 

“It all sounds rather fishy to me,” declared Pennington. 

Race said, in a gently authoritative manner: “I think you 
nust take it from me, Mr. Pennington, that we have ex- 
mined all the possibilities very carefully. The result is 
luite definite— Jacqueline de Bellefort did not shoot Mrs. 
)oyle. So we are forced to look elsewhere. That is where 
ve hope you may be able to help us.” 

“I?” Pennington gave a nervous start. 

“Yes. You were an intimate friend of the dead woman’s, 
fou know the circumstances of her life, in all probability, 


202 


Death on the Nile 


much better than her husband does, since he only made 
her acquaintance a few months ago. You would know, foi 
instance, of anyone who had a grudge against her. You 
would know, perhaps, whether there was anyone who had 
a motive for desiring her death.” 

Andrew Pennington passed his tongue over rather dry 
looking lips. 

“I assure you, I have no idea. . . . You see Linnet was 
brought up in England. I know very little of her surround- 
ings and associations.” 

“And yet,” mused Poirot, “there was someone on board 
who was interested in Madame Doyle’s removal. She had 
a near escape before, you remember, at this very place, 
when that boulder crashed down— Ah! but you were not 
there, perhaps?” 

“No. I was inside the temple at the time. I heard about 
it afterward, of course. A very near escape. But possibly 
an accident, don’t you think?” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“One thought so at the time. Now— one wonders.” 

“Yes— yes, of course.” Pennington wiped his face with 
a fine silk handkerchief. 

Colonel Race went on: “Mrs. Doyle happened to men- 
tion someone being on board who bore a grudge— not 
against her personally, but against her family. Do you 
know who that could be?” 

Pennington looked genuinely astonished. 

“No, I’ve no idea.” 

“She didn’t mention the matter to you?” 

“No.” 

“You were an intimate friend of her father’s— you can- 
not remember any business operations of his that might 


Death on the Nile 


203 


lave resulted in ruin for some business opponent?” 

Pennington shook his head helplessly. “No outstanding 
;ase. Such operations were frequent, of course, but I can’t 
•ecall anyone who uttered threats— nothing of that kind.” 

“In short, Mr. Pennington, you cannot help us?” 

“It seems so. I deplore my inadequacy, gentlemen.” 

Race interchanged a glance with Poirot, then he said: 
‘I’m sorry too. We’d had hopes.” 

He got up as a sign the interview was at an end. 

Andrew Pennington said: “As Doyle’s laid up, I expect 
ae’d like me to see to things. Pardon me. Colonel, but 
ivhat exactly are the arrangements?” 

“When we leave here we shall make a non-stop run to 
Shellal, arriving there tomorrow morning.” 

“And the body?” 

“Will be removed to one of the cold storage chambers.” 

Andrew Pennington bowed his head. Then he left the 
•oom. 

Poirot and Race again interchanged a glance. 

“Mr. Pennington,” said Race, lighting a cigarette, “was 
lot at all comfortable.” 

Poirot nodded. “And,” he said, “Mr. Pennington was 
sufficiently perturbed to tell a rather stupid lie. He was not 
n the temple of Abu Simbel when that boulder fell. I— 
7ioi qui vons parle — can swear to that. I had just come 
r rom there.” 

“A very stupid lie,” said Race, “and a very revealing 
)ne. 

Again Poirot nodded. 

“But for the moment,” he said, and smiled, “we handle 
tim with the gloves of kid, is it not so?” 

“That was the idea,” agreed Race. 


204 Death on the Nile 

“My friend, you and I understand each other to a mar- 
vel.” 

There was a faint grinding noise, a stir beneath their 
feet. The Karnak had started on her homeward journey 
to Shellal. 

“The pearls,” said Race. “That is the next thing to be 
cleared up.” 

“You have a plan?” 

“Yes.” He glanced at his watch. “It will be lunc^yime 
in half an hour. At the end of the meal I propq^e to 
make an announcement— just state the fact that the pearls 
have been stolen, and that I must request everyone to stay 
in the dining-saloon while a search is conducted.” 

Poirot nodded approvingly. 

“It is well imagined. Whoever took the pearls still has 
them. By giving no warning beforehand, there will be no 
chance of their being thrown overboard in a panic.” 

Race drew some sheets of paper toward him. He mur- 
mured apologetically: “I like to make a brief precis of the 
facts as I go along. It keeps one’s mind free of confusion.” 

“You do well. Method and order, they are everything,” 
replied Poirot. 

Race wrote for some minutes in his small neat script. 
Finally he pushed the result of his labours toward Poirot. 

“Anything you don’t agree with there?” 

Poirot took up the sheets.,! 'y were headed: 

MURDER OF MRS: TNET DOYLE 

’0 ) 

Mrs. Doyle was last seen alive by her maid, Louise Bour- 
get. Time: 11.30 (approx). 

From 1 1. 30-12. 20 following have alibis: Cornelia Rob- 
son, James Fanthorp, Simon Doyle, Jacqueline de Belle- 


Death on the Nile 


205 


{on— nobody else — but crime almost certainly committed 
after that time, since it is practically certain that pistol used 
was Jacqueline de Bellefort’s, which was then in her hand- 
bag. That her pistol was used is not absolutely certain until 
after post mortem and expert evidence re bullet— but it 
may be taken as overwhelmingly probable. 

Probable course of events: X (murderer) was witness 
of scene between Jacqueline and Simon Doyle in observa- 
tion ^aloon and noted where pistol went under settee. After 
the loon was vacant, X procured pistol— his or her idea 
being that Jacqueline de Bellefort would be thought guilty 
of crime. On this theory certain people are automatically 
cleared of suspicion: 

Cornelia Robson , since she had no opportunity to take 
pistol before James Fanthorp returned to search for it.‘ 

Miss Bowers— same. ” 

Dr. Bessner— same. 

N.B. Fanthorp is not definitely excluded from suspicion, 
since he could actually have pocketed pistol while declar- 
ing himself unable to find it. 

Any other person could have taken the pistol during 
that ten minutes’ interval. 

Possible motives for the murder: 

Andrew Bennington. This is on the assumption that he 
has been guilty of fraudulent practices. There is a certain 
amount of evidence in favour of that assumption, but not 
enough to justify making o^t a case against aim. If it was 
he who rolled down th<~ dder, he is a man who can 
seize a chance when it p nts itself. The cr ne, clearly, 
was not premeditated ex ,pt in a general way. Last night’s 
shooting scene was an ideal opportunity. 

Objections to the theory of Pennington’s guilt: Why 
did he throw the pistol overboard, since it constituted a 
valuable clue against J. B.? 


20 6 


Death on the Nile 


Fleetwood. Motive, revenge. Fleetwood considered him- 
self injured by Linnet Doyle. Might have overheard scene 
and noted position of pistol. He may have taken pistol be- 
cause it was a handy weapon, rather than with the idea of 
throwing guilt on Jacqueline. This would fit in with 
throwing it overboard. But if that were the case , why did 
he write J in blood on the wall ? 

N.B. Cheap handkerchief found with pistol more likely 
to have belonged to a man like Fleetwood than to one of 
the well-to-do passengers. 

Rosalie Otter bourne. Are we to accept Miss Van Schuy- 
ler’s evidence or Rosalie’s denial? Something was thrown 
overboard at that time and that something was presumably 
the pistol wrapped up in the velvet stole. 

Points to be noted. Had Rosalie any motive? She may 
have disliked Linnet Doyle and even been envious of her 
—but as a motive for murder that seems grossly inadequate. 
The evidence against her can be convincing only if we 
discover an adequate motive. As far as we know, there is 
no previous knowledge or link between Rosalie Otter- 
bourne and Linnet Doyle. 

Miss Van Schuyler. The velvet stole in which pistol was 
wrapped belongs to Miss Van Schuyler. According to her 
own statement she last saw it in the observation saloon. 
She drew attention to its loss during the evening, and a 
search was made for it without success. 

How did the stole come into the possession of X? Did 
X purloin it some time early in the evening? But if so, 
why? Nobody could tell, in advance, that there was going 
to be a scene between Jacqueline and Simon. Did X find 
the stole in the saloon when he went to get the pistol from 
under the settee? But if so, why was it not found when 
the search for it was made? Did it never leave Miss Van 
Schuyler’s possession? That is to say: Did Miss Van Schuy- 


Death on the Nile 


207 


ler murder Linnet Doyle? Is her accusation of Rosalie Ot- 
terboume a deliberate lie? If she did murder her, what 
was her motive? 

Other possibilities: 

Robbery as a motive. Possible, since the pearls have dis- 
appeared, and Linnet Doyle was certainly wearing them 
last night. 

Someone with a grudge against the Ridgeway family. 
Possibly— again no evidence. 

We know that there is a dangerous man on board— a 
killer. Here we have a killer and a death. May not the 
two be connected? But we should have to show that Lin- 
net Doyle possessed dangerous knowledge concerning this 
man. 

Conclusions: We can group the persons on board into 
two classes— those who had a possible motive or against 
whom there is definite evidence, and those who, as far as 
we know, are free of suspicion. 


Group l 


Group II 


Andrew Pennington 
Fleetwood 
Rosalie Otterbourne 
Miss Van Schuyler 
Louise Bourget (Robbery? ) 
Ferguson (Political?) 


Mrs. Allerton 
Tim Allerton 
Cornelia Robson 
Miss Bowers 
Dr. Bessner 
Signor Richetti 
Mrs. Otterbourne 
James Fanthorp 


Poirot pushed the paper back. 

“It is very just, very exact, what you have written 
there.” 

“You agree with it?” 

“Yes.” 

“And now what is your contribution?” 


208 


Death on the Nile 


Poirot drew himself up in an important manner. 

“Me, I pose to myself one question: ‘‘Why was the 
pistol thrown overboard?’ ” 

“That’s all?” 

“At the moment, yes. Until I can arrive at a satisfactory 
answer to that question, there is no sense anywhere. That 
is— that must be the starting point. You will notice, my 
friend, that, in your summary of where we stand, you 
have not attempted to answer that point.” 

Race shrugged his shoulders. 

“Panic.” 

Poirot shook his head perplexedly. He picked up the 
sodden velvet wrap and smoothed it out, wet and limp, on 
the table. His finger traced the scorched marks and the 
burnt holes. 

“Tell me, my friend,” he said suddenly. “You are more 
conversant with firearms than I am. Would such a thing 
as this, wrapped round a pistol, make much difference 
in muffling the sound?” 

“No, it wouldn’t. Not like a silencer, for instance.” 

Poirot nodded. He went on: “A man— certainly a man 
who had had much handling of firearms— would know that. 
But a woman— a woman would not know.” 

Race looked at him curiously. “Probably not.” 

“No. She would have read the detective stories where 
they are not always very exact as to details.” 

Race flicked the little pearl-handled pistol with his finger. 

“This little fellow wouldn’t make much noise anyway,” 
he said. “Just a pop, that’s all. With any other noise 
around, ten to one you wouldn’t notice it.” 

“Yes, I have reflected as to that.” 

Poirot picked up the handkerchief and examined it. 


Death on the Nile 


209 


“A man’s handkerchief— but not a gentleman’s handker- 
chief. Ce cher Wool worth, I imagine. Threepence at most.” 

“The sort of handkerchief a man like Fleetwood would 
own.” 

“Yes. Andrew Pennington, I notice, carries a very fine 
silk handkerchief.” 

“Ferguson?” suggested Race. 

“Possibly. As a gesture. But then it ought to be a 
bandana.” 

“Used it instead of a glove, I suppose, to hold the pis- 
tol and obviate fingerprints.” Race added, with slight 
facetiousness, “ ‘The Clue of the Blushing Handkerchief.’ ” 

“Ah, yes. Quite a jeune fille colour, is it not?” He laid 
it down and returned to the stole, once more examining 
the powder marks. 

“All the same,” he murmured, “it is odd . . .” 

“What’s that?” Poirot said gently: “ Cette panvre 
Madame Doyle. Lying there so peacefully . . . with the 
little hole in her head. You remember how she looked?” 

Race looked at him curiously. “You know,” he said, 
“I’ve got an idea you’re trying to tell me something— but 
I haven’t the faintest idea what it is.” 


CHAPTER XVIII 


There was a tap on the door. 

“Come in,” Race called. 

A steward entered. 

“Excuse me, sir,” he said to Poirot, “but Mr. Doyle is 
asking for you.” 

“I will come.” 

Poirot rose. He went out of the room and up the com- 
panionway to the promenade deck and along it to Dr. 
Bessner’s cabin. 

Simon, his face flushed and feverish, was propped up 
with pillows. He looked embarrassed. 

“Awfully good of you to come along, Monsieur Poirot. 
Look here, there’s something I want to ask you.” 

“Yes?” 

Simon got still redder in the face. 

“It’s— it’s about Jackie. I want to see her. Do you think 
—would you mind— would she mind, d’you think, if you 
asked her to come along here? You know I’ve been lying 
here thinking. . . . That wretched kid— she is only a kid 
after all— and I treated her damn badly— and— ” He stam- 
mered to silence. 

Poirot looked at him with interest. 

“You desire to see Mademoiselle Jacqueline? I will fetch 
her.” 

“Thanks. Awfully good of you.” 

Poirot went on his quest. He found Jacqueline de Belle- 

210 


Death on the Nile 


2 I I 


ort sitting huddled up in a corner of the observation saloon. 
There was an open book on her lap but she was not read- 

ng- 

Poirot said gently: “Will you come with me, Made- 
noiselle? Monsieur Doyle wants to see you.” 

She started up. Her face flushed— then paled. She looked 
>ewildered. 

“Simon? He wants to see me— to see me?” 

He found her incredulity moving. 

“Will you come, Mademoiselle?” 

“I— yes, of course I will.” 

She went with him in a docile fashion, like a child, but 
ike a puzzled child. 

Poirot passed into the cabin. 

“Here is Mademoiselle.” 

She stepped in after him, wavered, stood still . . . 
tanding there mute and dumb, her eyes fixed on Simon’s 
ace. 

“Hullo, Jackie.” He, too, was embarrassed. He went on: 
‘Awfully good of you to come. I wanted to say— I mean— 
Vhat I mean is—” 

She interrupted him then. Her words came out in a rush 
[-breathless, desperate. 

“Simon— I didn’t kill Linnet. You know I didn’t do that. 
. . I— I— was mad last night. Oh, can you ever forgive 
ne?” 

Words came more easily to him now. 

“Of course. That’s all right! Absolutely all right! That’s 
*vhat I wanted to say. Thought you might be worrying a 
)it, you know. . . 

“ Worrying ? A bit? Oh! Simon!” 

“That’s what I wanted to see you about. It’s quite all 


212 


Death on the Nile 


right, see, old girl? You just got a bit rattled last night- 
a shade tight. All perfectly natural.” 

“Oh, Simon! I might have killed you!” 

“Not you. Not with a rotten little peashooter likt 
that. . . 

“And your leg! Perhaps you’ll never walk again. . . .’ 

“Now, look here, Jackie, don’t be maudlin. As soon a: 
we get to Assuan they’re going to put the X-rays to work 
and dig out that tin pot bullet, and everything will be a: 
right as rain.” 

Jacqueline gulped twice; then she rushed forward anc 
knelt down by Simon’s bed, burying her face and sob 
bing. Simon patted her awkwardly on the head. His eye: 
met Poirot’s and, with a reluctant sigh, the latter left th< 
cabin. 

He heard broken murmurs as he went: 

“How could I be such a devil? Oh, Simon! . . . I’m sc 
dreadfully sorry. . . 

Outside Cornelia Robson was leaning over the rail. Shf 
turned her head. 

“Oh, it’s you, Monsieur Poirot. It seems so awful some 
how that it should be such a lovely day.” 

Poirot looked up at the sky. 

“When the sun shines you cannot see the moon,” h< 
said. “But when the sun is gone— ah, when the sun is gone.’ 

Cornelia’s mouth fell open. 

“I beg your pardon?” 

“I was saying, Mademoiselle, that when the sun ha: 
gone down, we shall see the moon. That is so, is it not?’ 

“Why— why, yes— certainly.” 

She looked at him doubtfully. 

Poirot laughed gently. 


Death on the Nile 


213 


“I utter the imbecilities,” he said. “Take no notice.” 

He strolled gently toward the stern of the boat. As he 
assed the next cabin he paused for a minute. He caught 
ragments of speech from within: 

“Utterly ungrateful— after all I’ve done for you— no 
onsideration for your wretched mother— no idea of what 
suffer. . . 

Poirot’s lips stiffened as he pressed them together. He 
iised a hand and knocked. 

There was a startled silence and Mrs. Otterbourne’s 
oice called out, “Who’s that?” 

“Is Mademoiselle Rosalie there?” 

Rosalie appeared in the doorway. Poirot was shocked at 
er appearance. There were dark circles under her eyes 
id drawn lines round her mouth. 

“What’s the matter?” she said ungraciously. “What do 
ou want?” 

“The pleasure of a few minutes’ conversation with you, 
iHdemoiselle. Will you come?” 

Her mouth went sulky at once. She shot him a suspicious 
'bok. 

“Why should I?” 

“I entreat you, Mademoiselle.” 

“Oh, I suppose—” 

She stepped out on the deck, closing the door behind 
ler. 

“Well?” 

Poirot took her gently by the arm and drew her along 
te deck, still in the direction of the stern. They passed 
le bathrooms and round the corner. They had the stern 
art of the deck to themselves. The Nile flowed away 
ehind them. 


214 Death on the Nile 

Poirot rested his elbows on the rail. Rosalie stood uj 
straight and stiff. 

“Well?” she asked again, and her voice held the sam< 
ungracious tone. 

Poirot spoke slowly, choosing his words. “I could asl 
you certain questions, Mademoiselle, but I do not thinl 
for one moment that you would consent to answer them.’ I 

“Seems rather a waste to bring me along here then.” 

Poirot drew a finger slowly along the wooden rail. 

“You are accustomed, Mademoiselle, to carrying your 
own burdens. . . . But you can do that too long. Tht 
strain becomes too great. For you, Mademoiselle, the strair 
is becoming too great.” 

“I don’t know what you are talking about,” said Rosalie 

“I am talking about facts, Mademoiselle— plain ugh 
facts. Let us call the spade the spade and say it in out 
little short sentence. Your mother drinks, Mademoiselle.’ 

Rosalie did not answer. Her mouth opened; then she 
closed it again. For once she seemed at a loss. 

“There is no need for you to talk, Mademoiselle. I will 
do all the talking. I was interested at Assuan in the rela- 
tions existing between you. I saw at once that, in spite ol 
your carefully studied unfilial remarks, you were in reality 
passionately protecting her from something. I very soon 
knew what that something was. I knew it long before 1 
encountered your mother one morning in an unmistakable 
state of intoxication. Moreover, her case, I could see, wa; 
one of secret bouts of drinking— by far the most difficult 
kind of case with which to deal. You were coping witf 
it manfully. Nevertheless, she had all the secret drunkard’' 
cunning. She managed to get hold of a secret supply oi 
spirits and to keep it successfully hidden from you. I shoulc 


Death on the Nile 


215 


tot be surprised if you discovered its hiding place only 
•esterday. Accordingly, last night, as soon as your mother 
,/as really soundly asleep, you stole out with the contents 
if the cache , went round to the other side of the boat 
since your own side was up against the bank) and cast 
: f overboard into the Nile.” 

He paused. 

“I am right, am I not?” 

“Yes— you’re quite right.” Rosalie spoke with sudden 
assion. “I was a fool not to say so, I suppose! But I didn’t 
/ant everyone to know. It would go all over the boat, 
tnd it seemed so-so silly— I mean— that I—” 

Poirot finished the sentence for her. 

“So silly that you should be suspected of committing 

murder? ” 

Rosalie nodded. 

Then she burst out again: “I’ve tried so hard to— keep 
yeryone from knowing. ... It isn’t really her fault. She 
Jot discouraged. Her books didn’t sell any more. People 
re tired of all that cheap sex stuff. ... It hurt her— it 
qrt her dreadfully. And so she began to— to drink. For a 
png time I didn’t know why she was so queer. Then, 
Ten I found out, I tried to— to stop it. She’d be all right 
Ipr a bit, and then, suddenly, she’d start, and there would 
p dreadful quarrels and rows with people. It was awful.” 
he shuddered. “I had always to be on the watch— to get 
er away . . . 

“And then— she began to dislike me for it. She— she’s 
irned right against me. I think she almost hates me some- 
; : mes. . . .” 

j “ Pauvre petite ,” said Poirot. 

She turned on him vehemently. 


2 1 6 


Death on the Nile 


“Don’t be sorry for me. Don’t be kind. It’s easier i 
you’re not.” She sighed— a long heartrending sigh. “I’r 
so tired . . . I’m so deadly, deadly tired.” 

“I know,” said Poirot. 

“People think I’m awful. Stuck-up and cross and bad 
tempered. I can’t help it. I’ve forgotten how to be— to b 
nice.” 

“That is what I said to you; you have carried you 
burden by yourself too long.” 

Rosalie said slowly: “It is a relief— to talk about it. Yoi 
—you’ve always been kind to me, Monsieur Poirot. Pe 
afraid I’ve been rude to you often.” 

“La politesse, it is not necessary between friends.” 

The suspicion came back to her face suddenly. 

“Are you— are you going to tell everyone? I suppos 
you must, because of those damned bottles I threw over 
board.” 

“No, no, it is not necessary. Just tell me what I wan 
to know. At what time was this? Ten minutes past one? 

“About that, I should think. I don’t remember exactly. 

“Now tell me, Mademoiselle. Mademoiselle Van Schuy- 
ler saw you, did you see her?” 

Rosalie shook her head. 

“No, I didn’t.” 

“She says that she looked out of the door of her cabin. 

“I don’t think I should have seen her. I just lookei 
along the deck and then out to the river.” 

Poirot nodded. 

“And did you see anyone— anyone at all, when yo 
looked down the deck?” 

There was a pause— quite a long pause. Rosalie wa 


Death on the Nile 


217 


j owning. She seemed to be thinking earnestly. 

At last she shook her head quite decisively. 

“No,” she said. “I saw nobody.” 

Hercule Poirot slowly nodded his head. But his eyes 
"fere grave. 

i 


! 




CHAPTER XIX 


ffi 

QL - - 1 


People crept into the dining-saloon by ones and two; 
in a very subdued manner. There seemed a general feel- 
ing that to sit down eagerly to food displayed an unfor- 
tunate heartlessness. It was with an almost apologetic au 
that one passenger after another came and sat down at 
their tables. 

Tim Allerton arrived some few minutes after his mothei 
had taken her seat. He was looking in a thoroughly bar 
temper. 

“I wish we’d never come on this blasted trip,” he 
growled. 

Mrs. Allerton shook her head sadly. 

“Oh, my dear, so do I. That beautiful girl! It all seems 
such a waste. To think that anyone could shoot her ir 
cold blood. It seems awful to me that anyone could dc 
such a thing. And that other poor child.” 

“Jacqueline?” 

“Yes; my heart aches for her. She looks so dreadfully 
unhappy.” 

“Teach her not to go round loosing off toy firearms,’' 
said Tim unfeelingly as he helped himself to butter. 

“I expect she was badly brought up.” 

“Oh, for God’s sake, Mother, don’t go all maternal 
about it.” 

“You’re in a shocking bad temper, Tim.” 

“Yes, I am. Who wouldn’t be?” 

218 


Death on the Nile 219 

“I don’t see what there is to be cross about. It’s just 
rightfully sad.” 

Tim said crossly: “You’re taking the romantic point of 
iew! What you don’t seem to realize is that it’s no joke 
eing mixed up in a murder case.” 

Mrs. Allerton looked a little startled. 

“But surely—” 

j “That’s just it. There’s no ‘But surely’ about it. Every- 
ne on this damned boat is under suspicion— you and I 
S well as the rest of them.” 

Mrs. Allerton demurred. “Technically we are, I sup- 
ose— but actually it’s ridiculous!” 

“There’s nothing ridiculous where murder’s concerned! 
ou may sit there, darling, just exuding virtue and con- 
nous rectitude, but a lot of unpleasant policemen at 
hellal or Assuan won’t take you at your face value.” 

“Perhaps the truth will be known before then.” 

“Why should it be?” 

1 “Monsieur Poirot may find out.” 

“That old mountebank? He won’t find out anything, 
le’s all talk and moustaches.” 

“Well, Tim,” said Mrs. Allerton, “I daresay everything 
ou say is true, but, even if it is, we’ve got to go through 
dth it, so we might as well make up our minds to it 
id go through with it as cheerfully as we can.” 

But her son showed no abatement of gloom. 

“There’s this blasted business of the pearls being miss- 
ig, too.” 

“Linnet’s pearls?” 

“Yes. It seems somebody must have pinched ’em.” 

“I suppose that was the motive for the crime,” said Mrs. 
llerton. 


220 Death on the Nile 

“Why should it be? You’re mixing up two perfectly 
different things.” 

“Who told you that they were missing?” 

“Ferguson. He got it from his tough friend in the en- 
gine room, who got it from the maid.” 

“They were lovely pearls,” declared Mrs. Allerton. 

Poirot sat down at the table, bowing to Mrs. Allerton. 

“I am a little late,” he said. 

“I expect you have been busy,” Mrs. Allerton replied 

“Yes, I have been much occupied.” 

He ordered a fresh bottle of wine from the waiter. 

“We’re very catholic in our tastes,” said Mrs. Allerton 
“You drink wine always; Tim drinks whisky and soda 
and I try all the different brands of mineral water in turn.’ 

“ Tiens /” said Poirot. He stared at her for a moment 
He murmured to himself, “It is an idea, that. . . 

Then, with an impatient shrug of his shoulders, he dis 
missed the sudden preoccupation that had distracted hin 
and began to chat lightly of other matters. 

“Is Mr. Doyle badly hurt?” asked Mrs. Allerton. 

“Yes, it is a fairly serious injury. Dr. Bessner is anxiou 
to reach Assuan so that his leg can be X-rayed and th 
bullet removed. But he hopes that there will be no per 
manent lameness.” 

“Poor Simon,” said Mrs. Allerton. “Only yesterday h 
looked such a happy boy, with everything in the worl< 
he wanted. And now his beautiful wife killed and h 
himself laid up and helpless. I do hope, though—” 

“What do you hope, Madame?” asked Poirot as Mr: 
Allerton paused. 

“I hope he’s not too angry with that poor child.” 

“With Mademoiselle Jacqueline? Quite the contrary 
He was full of anxiety on her behalf.” 


Death on the Nile 


in 


He turned to Tim. 

“You know, it is a pretty little problem of psychology, 
hat. All the time that Mademoiselle Jacqueline was fol- 
owing them from place to place, he was absolutely furi- 
>us; but now, when she has actually shot him, and 
vounded him dangerously— perhaps made him lame for 
ife— all his anger seems to have evaporated. Can you un- 
lerstand that?” 

“Yes,” said Tim thoughtfully, “I think I can. The first 
hing made him feel a fool—” 

Poirot nodded. “You are right. It offended his male dig- 
lity.” 

“But now— if you look at it a certain way, it’s she who’s 
nade a fool of herself. Everyone’s down on her, and so—” 

“He can be generously forgiving,” finished Mrs. Ailer- 
on. “What children men are!” 

“A profoundly untrue statement that women always 
lake,” murmured Tim. 

Poirot smiled. Then he said to Tim, “Tell me, Madame 
)oyle’s cousin, Miss Joanna Southwood, did she resemble 
dadame Doyle?” 

“You’ve got it a little wrong, Monsieur Poirot. She was 
ur cousin and Linnet’s friend.” 

“Ah, pardon— I was confused. She is a young lady much 
1 the news, that. I have been interested in her for some 
me.” 

“Why?” asked Tim sharply. 

Poirot half rose to bow to Jacqueline de Belief ort, who 
ad just come in and passed their table on the way to 
er own. Her cheeks were flushed and her eyes bright, 
id her breath came a little unevenly. As he resumed his 
:at Poirot seemed to have forgotten Tim’s question. He 
lurmured vaguely, “I wonder if all young ladies with 


222 


Death on the Nile 


valuable jewels were as careless as Madame Doyle was?” 

“It is true, then, that they were stolen?” asked Mrs. 
Allerton. 

“Who told you so, Madame?” 

“Ferguson said so,” Tim volunteered. 

Poirot nodded gravely. 

“It is quite true.” 

“I suppose,” said Mrs. Allerton nervously, “that this 
will mean a lot of unpleasantness for all of us. Tim says 
it will.” 

Her son scowled, but Poirot had turned to him. 

“Ah! you have had previous experience, perhaps? You 
have been in a house where there was a robbery?” 

“Never,” said Tim. 

“Oh, yes, darling, you were at the Portarlingtons’ that 
time— when that awful woman’s diamonds were stolen.” 

“You always get things hopelessly wrong, Mother. I 
was there when it was discovered that the diamonds she 
was wearing round her fat neck were only paste! The ac- 
tual substitution was probably done months earlier. As a 
matter of fact, a lot of people said she’d had it done her- 
self!” 

“Joanna said so, I expect.” 

“Joanna wasn’t there.” 

“But she knew them quite well. And it’s very like her 
to make that kind of suggestion.” 

“You’re always down on Joanna, Mother.” 

Poirot hastily changed the subject. He had it in mind | 
to make a really big purchase at one of the Assuan shops. 
Some very attractive purple and gold material at one of 
the Indian merchants. There would, of course, be the duty 
to pay, but— 


Death o?i the Nile 


223 


“They tell me that they can— how do you say?— expedite 
it for me. And that the charges will not be too high. How 
think you, will it arrive all right?” 

Mrs. Allerton said that many people, so she had heard, 
had had things sent straight to England from the shops 
in question and that everything had arrived safely. 

“ Bien . Then I will do that. But the trouble one has, 
when one is abroad, if a parcel comes out from England! 
Have you had experience of that? Have you had any 
parcels arrive since you have been on your travels?” 

“I don’t think we have, have we, Tim? You get books 
sometimes, but of course there is never any trouble about 
them.” 

“Ah, no, books are different.” 

Dessert had been served. Now, without any previous 
warning, Colonel Race stood up and made his speech. 

He touched on the circumstances of the crime and an- 
nounced the theft of the pearls. A search of the boat was 
about to be instituted, and he would be obliged if all the 
passengers would remain in the saloon until this was com- 
pleted. Then, after that, if the passengers agreed, as he 
was sure they would, they themselves would be kind 
enough to submit to a search. 

Poirot slipped nimbly along to his side. There was a 
little buzz and hum all round them. Voices doubtful, in- 
dignant, excited. . . . 

Poirot reached Race’s side and murmured something in 
his ear just as the latter was about to leave the dining- 
saloon. 

Race listened, nodded assent, and beckoned a steward. 
He said a few brief words to him; then, together with 
Poirot, he passed out onto the deck, closing the door be- 


224 


Death on the Nile 


hind him. 

They stood for a minute or two by the rail. Race lit a 
cigarette. 

“Not a bad idea of yours,” he said. “We’ll soon see if 
there’s anything in it. I’ll give ’em three minutes.” 

The door of the dining-saloon opened and the same 
steward to whom they had spoken came out. He saluted ^ 
Race and said: “Quite right, sir. There’s a lady who says I 
it’s urgent she should speak to you at once without any I 
delay.” 

“Ah!” Race’s face showed his satisfaction. “Who is it?” 

“Miss Bowers, sir, the hospital nurse lady.” 

A slight shade of surprise showed on Race’s face. He 
said: “Bring her to the smoking-room. Don’t let anyone 
else leave.” 

“No, sir— the other steward will attend to that.” 

He went back into the dining-room. Poirot and Race 
went to the smoking-room. 

“Bowers, eh?” murmured Race. 

They had hardly got inside the smoking-room before 
the steward reappeared with Miss Bowers. He ushered her 
in and left, shutting the door behind him. 

“Well, Miss Bowers?” Colonel Race looked at her in- 
quiringly. “What’s all this?” 

Miss Bowers looked her usual composed, unhurried self. 
She displayed no particular emotion. 

“You’ll excuse me, Colonel Race,” she said, “but under 
the circumstances I thought the best thing to do would 
be to speak to you at once”— she opened her neat black 
handbag— “and to return you these.” 

She took out a string of pearls and laid them on the table. 


CHAPTER XX 


If Miss Bowers had been the kind of woman who en- 
joyed creating a sensation, she would have been richly re- 
paid by the result of her action. 

A look of utter astonishment passed over Colonel Race’s 
face as he picked up the pearls from the table. 

“This is most extraordinary,” he said. “Will you kindly 
explain, Miss Bowers?” 

“Of course. That’s what I’ve come to do.” Miss Bow- 
ers settled herself comfortably in a chair. “Naturally it 
was a little difficult for me to decide what it was best for 
me to do. The family would naturally be averse to scandal 
of any kind, and they trust my discretion, but the cir- 
cumstances are so very unusual that it really leaves me 
no choice. Of course, when you didn’t find anything in 
the cabins, your next move would be a search of the pas- 
sengers, and if the pearls were then found in my posses- 
sion it would be rather an awkward situation and the truth 
would come out just the same.” 

“And just what is the truth? Did you take these pearls 
from Mrs. Doyle’s cabin?” 

“Oh, no, Colonel Race, of course not. Miss Van Schuy- 
ler did.” 

“Miss Van Schuyler?” 

“Yes. She can’t help it, you know, but she does— er— 
take things. Especially jewellery. That’s really why I’m 
always with her. It s not her health at all; it’s this little 

225 


226 


Death on the Nile 


idiosyncrasy. I keep on the alert, and fortunately there’s ' 
never been any trouble since I’ve been with her. It just 
means being watchful, you know. And she always hides s 
the things she takes in the same place— rolled up in a pair ' 
of stockings— so that makes it very simple. I look each ' 
morning. Of course I’m a light sleeper, and I always sleep 
next door to her, and with the communicating door open 
if it’s in a hotel, so that I usually hear. Then I go after 
her and persuade her to go back to bed. Of course it’s been ; 
rather more difficult on a boat. But she doesn’t usually 
do it at night. It’s more just picking up things that she 
sees left about. Of course, pearls have a great attraction 
for her always.” 

Miss Bowers ceased speaking. 

Race asked, “How did you discover they had been 
taken?” 

“They were in her stockings this morning. I knew whose 
they were, of course. I’ve often noticed them. I went along 
to put them back, hoping that Mrs. Doyle wasn’t up yet 
and hadn’t discovered her loss. But there was a steward 
standing there, and he told me about the murder and that 
no one could go in. So then, you see, I was in a regular 
quandary. But I still hoped to slip them back in the cabin 
later, before their absence had been noticed. I can assure 
you I’ve passed a very unpleasant morning wondering what 
was the best thing to do. You see the Van Schuyler family 
is so very particular and exclusive. It would never do if 
this got into the newspapers. But that won’t be necessary, 
will it?” 

Miss Bowers really looked worried. 

“That depends on circumstances,” said Colonel Race 
cautiously. “But we shall do our best for you, of course. 


i 


Death on the Nile 


227 


What does Miss Van Schuyler say to this?” 

“Oh, she’ll deny it, of course. She always does. Says 
some wicked person has put it there. She never admits tak- 
ing anything. That’s why if you catch her in time she goes 
back to bed like a lamb. Says she just went out to look 
at the moon. Something like that.” 

“Does Miss Robson know about this— er— failing? ” 

“No, she doesn’t. Her mother knows, but she’s a very 
simple kind of girl and her mother thought it best she 
should know nothing about it. I was quite equal to dealing 
with Miss Van Schuyler,” added the competent Miss 
Bowers. 

“We have to thank you, Mademoiselle, for coming to us 
so promptly,” said Poirot. 

Miss Bowers stood up. 

“I’m sure I hope I’ve acted for the best.” 

“Be assured that you have.” 

“You see, what with there being a murder as well—” 

Colonel Race interrupted her. His voice was grave. 

“Miss Bowers, I am going to ask you a question, and I 
want to impress upon you that it has got to be answered 
truthfully. Miss Van Schuyler is unhinged mentally to the 
extent of being a kleptomaniac. Has she also a tendency to 
homicidal mania?” 

Miss Bowers’ answer came immediately: “Oh, dear me, 
no! Nothing of that kind. You can take my word for it 
absolutely. The old lady wouldn’t hurt a fly.” 

The reply came with such positive assurance that there 
seemed nothing more to be said. Nevertheless Poirot did 
interpolate one mild inquiry. 

“Does Miss Van Schuyler suffer at all from deafness?” 

“As a matter of fact she does, Monsieur Poirot. Not so 


228 


Death on the Nile 


that you’d notice it any way, not if you were speaking to 
her, I mean. But quite often she doesn’t hear you when 
you come into a room. Things like that.” 

“Do you think she would have heard anyone moving 
about in Mrs. Doyle’s cabin, which is next door to her 
own? ” 

“Oh, I shouldn’t think so— not for a minute. You see, the 
bunk is the other side of the cabin, not even against the 
partition wall. No, I don’t think she would have heard 
anything.” 

“Thank you, Miss Bowers.” 

Race said, “Perhaps you will now go back to the dining- 
saloon and wait with the others?” 

He opened the door for her and watched her go down 
the staircase and enter the saloon. Then he shut the door 
and came back to the table. Poirot had picked up the 
pearls. 

“Well,” said Race grimly, “that reaction came pretty 
quickly. That’s a very cool-headed and astute young 
woman— perfectly capable of holding out on us still further 
if she thinks it suits her book. What about Miss Marie 
Van Schuyler now? I don’t think we can eliminate her 
from the possible suspects. You know, she might have 
committed murder to get hold of those jewels. We can’t 
take the nurse’s word for it. She’s all out to do the best for 
the family.” 

Poirot nodded in agreement. He was very busy with the 
pearls, running them through his fingers, holding them up 
to his eyes. 

He said: “We may take it, I think, that part of the old 
lady’s story to us was true. She did look out of her cabin 
and she did see Rosalie Otterbourne. But I don’t think she 


Death on the Nile 


229 


heard anything or anyone in Linnet Doyle’s cabin. I think 
she was just peering out from her cabin preparatory to 
slipping along and purloining the pearls.” 

“The Otterbourne girl was there, then?” 

“Yes. Throwing her mother’s secret cache of drink over- 
board.” 

Colonel Race shook his head sympathetically. 

“So that’s it! Tough on a young un.” 

“Yes, her life has not been very gay, cette pauvre petite 
Rosalie .” 

“Well, I’m glad that’s been cleared up. She didn’t see or 
hear anything?” 

“I asked her that. She responded— after a lapse of quite 
twenty seconds— that she saw nobody.” 

“Oh?” Race looked alert. 

“Yes, it is suggestive, that.” 

Race said slowly: “If Linnet Doyle was shot round about 
ten minutes past one, or indeed any time after the boat had 
quieted down, it has seemed amazing to me that no one 
heard the shot. I grant you that a little pistol like that 
wouldn’t make much noise, but all the same the boat would 
be deadly quiet, and any noise, even a gentle pop, should 
have been heard. But I begin to understand better now. 
The cabin on the forward side of hers was unoccupied— 

■ since her husband was in Dr. Bessner’s cabin. The one 
aft was occupied by the Van Schuyler woman, who was 
deaf. That leaves only—” 

He paused and looked expectantly at Poirot, who 
nodded. 

“The cabin next to hers on the other side of the boat. In 
other words— Pennington. We always seem to come back 
to Pennington.” 


2 3 ° 


Death on the Nile 


“We will come back to him presently with the kid 
gloves removed! Ah, yes, I am promising myself that 
pleasure.” 

“In the meantime we’d better get on with our search of 
the boat. The pearls still make a convenient excuse, even 
though they have been returned— but Miss Bowers is not 
likely to advertise that fact.” 

“Ah, these pearls! ” Poirot held them up against the light 
once more. He stuck out his tongue and licked them; he 
even gingerly tried one of them between his teeth. Then, 
with a sigh, he threw them down on the table. 

“Here are more complications, my friend,” he said. “I 
am not an expert on precious stones, but I have had a 
good deal to do with them in my time and I am fairly 
certain of what I say. These pearls are only a clever imi- 
tation.” 


CHAPTER XXI 


Colonel Race swore lustily. 

“This damned case gets more and more involved.” He 
picked up the pearls. “I suppose you’ve not made a mis- 
take? They look all right to me.” 

“They are a very good imitation— yes.” 

“Now where does that lead us? I suppose Linnet Doyle 
didn’t deliberately have an imitation made and bring it 
abroad with her for safety. Many women do.” 

“I think, if that were so, her husband would know 
about it.” 

“She may not have told him.” 

Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner. 

“No, I do not think that is so. I was admiring Madame 
Doyle’s pearls the first evening on the boat— their wonder- 
ful sheen and lustre. I am sure that she was wearing the 
genuine ones then.” 

“That brings us up against two possibilities. First, that 
Miss Van Schuyler only stole the imitation string after 
the real ones had been stolen by someone else. Second, that 
the whole kleptomaniac story is a fabrication. Either Miss 
Bowers is a thief, and quickly invented the story and al- 
layed suspicion by handing over the false pearls, or else 
that whole party is in it together. That is to say, they are a 
gang of clever jewel thieves masquerading as an exclusive 
American family.” 

“Yes,” Poirot murmured. “It is difficult to say. But I 


2 3 2 


Death on the Nile 


will point out to you one thing— to make a perfect and 
exact copy of the pearls, clasp and all, good enough to 
stand a chance of deceiving Madame Doyle, is a highly 
skilled technical performance. It could not be done in a 
hurry. Whoever copied those pearls must have had a good 
opportunity of studying the original.” 

Race rose to his feet. 

“Useless to speculate about it any further now. Let’s get 
on with the job. We’ve got to find the real pearls. And at 
the same time we’ll keep our eyes open.” 

They disposed first of the cabins occupied on the lower 
deck. 

That of Signor Richetti contained various archaeological 
works in different languages, a varied assortment of cloth- 
ing, hair lotions of a highly scented kind and two personal 
letters— one from an archaeological expedition in Syria, 
and one from, apparently, a sister in Rome. His handker- 
chiefs were all of coloured silk. 

They passed on to Ferguson’s cabin. i 

There was a sprinkling of communistic literature, a good i 
many snapshots, Samuel Butler’s Erewhon and a cheap edi- ; 
tion of Pepys’ Diary. His personal possessions were not \ 
many. Most of what outer clothing there was was torn and t 
dirty; the underclothing, on the other hand, was of really 1 
good quality. The handkerchiefs were expensive linen 1 
ones. £ 

“Some interesting discrepancies,” murmured Poirot. t 

Race nodded. “Rather odd that there are absolutely no it 
personal papers, letters, etc.” c 

“Yes; that gives one to think. An odd young man, Mon- 
sieur Ferguson.” 

He looked thoughtfully at a signet ring he held in his, 


I 


Death on the Nile 233 

land, before replacing it in the drawer where he had found 

t. 

They went along to the cabin occupied by Louise Bour- 
*et. The maid had her meals after the other passengers, but 
.Face had sent word that she was to be taken to join the 
ithers. A cabin steward met them. 

“I’m sorry, sir,” he apologized, “but I’ve not been able 
:o find the young woman anywhere. I can’t think where 
he can have got to.” 

Race glanced inside the cabin. It was empty. 

They went up to the promenade deck and started on the 
;tarboard side. The first cabin was that occupied by James 
"anthorp. Here all was in meticulous order. Mr. Fanthorp 
ravelled light, but all that he had was of good quality. 

“No letters,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “He is careful, 
>ur Mr. Fanthorp, to destroy his correspondence.” 

They passed on to Tim Allerton’s cabin, next door. 

There were evidences here of an Anglo Catholic turn of 
nind— an exquisite little triptych, and a big rosary of in- 
ricately carved wood. Besides personal clothing, there was 
: half completed manuscript, a good deal annotated and 
cribbled over, and a good collection of books, most of 
hem recently published. There were also a quantity of 
etters thrown carelessly into a drawer. Poirot, never in the 
east scrupulous about reading other people’s correspond- 
nce, glanced through them. He noted that amongst them 
here were no letters from Joanna Southwood. He picked 
ip a tube of seccotine, fingered it absently for a minute 
»r two, then said, “Let us pass on.” 

“No Woolworth handkerchiefs,” reported Race, rapidly 
eplacing the contents of a drawer. 

Mrs. Allerton’s cabin was the next. It was exquisitely 


234 Death on the Nile 

neat, and a faint old-fashioned smell of lavender hung 
about it. 

The two men’s search was soon over. Race remarked as t 
they left it, “Nice woman, that.” 

The next cabin was that which had been used as a dress- d 
ing-room by Simon Doyle. His immediate necessities— i 
pyjamas, toilet things, etc., had been moved to Bessner’s ( 
cabin, but the remainder of his possessions were still there t 
—two good-sized leather suitcases and a kit bag. There were f 
also some clothes in the wardrobe. - 

“We will look carefully here, my friend,” said Poirot, 
“for it is very possible that the thief hid the pearls here.” j 

“You think it is likely?” 

“But yes, indeed. Consider! The thief, whoever he or she i 
may be, must know that sooner or later a search will be ( 
made, and therefore a hiding place in his or her own cabin | 
would be injudicious in the extreme. The public rooms ( 
present other difficulties. But here is a cabin belonging to i 
a man who cannot possibly visit it himself, so that, if the 
pearls are found here, it tells us nothing at all.” 

But the most meticulous search failed to reveal any trace 
of the missing necklace. 

Poirot murmured “Zut!” to himself and they emerged 
once more on the deck. 

Linnet Doyle’s cabin had been locked after the body | 
was removed, but Race had the key with him. He unlocked ( 
the door and the two men stepped inside. 

Except for the removal of the girl’s body, the cabin was 
exactly as it had been that morning. 

“Poirot,” said Race, “if there’s anything to be found 
here, for God’s sake go ahead and find it. You can if any- ji 
one can— I know that.” 


Death on the Nile 


235 


“This time you do not mean the pearls, mon ami?” 

“No. The murder’s the main thing. There may be some- 
rhing I overlooked this morning.” 

Quietly, deftly, Poirot went about his search. He went 
lown on his knees and scrutinized the floor inch by inch. 
He examined the bed. He went rapidly through the ward- 
robe and chest of drawers. He went through the wardrobe 
:runk and the two costly suitcases. He looked through the 
jxpensive gold-fitted dressingcase. Finally he turned his 
ittention to the washstand. There were various creams, 
jowders, face lotions. But the only thing that seemed to 
nterest Poirot were two little bottles labelled Nailex. Fie 
ncked them up at last and brought them to the dressing- 
able. One, which bore the inscription Nailex Rose, was 
:mpty but for a drop or two of dark red fluid at the 
bottom. The other, the same size, but labelled Nailex 
Cardinal, was nearly full. Poirot uncorked first the empty, 
hen the full one, and sniffed them both delicately. 

An odour of pear drops billowed into the room. With a 
light grimace he recorked them. 

“Get anything?” asked Race. 

Poirot replied by a French proverb, “On ne prend pas les 
vnouches avec le vinaigre .” Then he said with a sigh: “My 
riend, we have not been fortunate. The murderer has not 
<een obliging. He has not dropped for us the cuff link, the 
igarette end, the cigar ash— or, in the case of a woman, the 
andkerchief, the lipstick or the hair slide.” 

“Only the bottle of nail polish?” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

I “I must ask the maid. There is something— yes— a little 
urious there.” 

“I wonder where ;he devil the girl’s got to?” said Race. 


Death on the Nile 


236 

They left the cabin, locking the door behind them, and 
passed on to that of Miss Van Schuyler. 

Here again were all the appurtenances of wealth, expen- 
sive toilet fittings, good luggage, a certain number of pri- 
vate letters and papers all perfectly in order. 

The next cabin was the double one occupied by Poirot, 
and beyond it that of Race. 

“Hardly likely to hide ’em in either of these,” said the 
Colonel. 

Poirot demurred. “It might be. Once, on the Orient Ex- 
press, I investigated a murder. There was a little matter 
of a scarlet kimono. It had disappeared, and yet it must be 
on the train. I found it— where do you think? In my own 
locked suitcase! Ah! it was an impertinence, that!” 

“Well, let’s see if anybody has been impertinent with 
you or me this time.” 

But the thief of the pearls had not been impertinent with 
Hercule Poirot or with Colonel Race. 

Rounding the stern they made a very careful search of 
Miss Bowers’ cabin but could find nothing of a suspicious 
nature. Her handkerchiefs were of plain linen with an 
initial. : 

The Otterbournes’ cabin came next. Here, again, Poirot < 

made a very meticulous search, but with no result. 

The next cabin was Bessner’s. Simon Doyle lay with an 
untasted tray of food beside him. 

“Off my feed,” he said apologetically. s 

He was looking feverish and very much worse than e 
earlier in the day. Poirot appreciated Bessner’s anxiety to n 
get him as swiftly as possible to hospital and skilled appli- 
ances. a 

The little Belgian explained what the two of them were 


Death on the Nile 


237 


doing, and Simon nodded approval. On learning that the 
pearls had been restored by Miss Bowers, but proved to be 
merely imitation, he expressed the most complete astonish- 
ment. 

“You are quite sure. Monsieur Doyle, that your wife 
did not have an imitation string which she brought abroad 
with her instead of the real ones?” 

Simon shook his head decisively. 

“Oh, no. I’m quite sure of that. Linnet loved those pearls 
and she wore ’em everywhere. They were insured against 
every possible risk, so I think that made her a bit careless.” 

“Then we must continue our search.” 

He started opening drawers. Race attacked a suitcase. 

Simon stared. “Look here, you surely don’t suspect old 
Bessner pinched them?” Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“It might be so. After all, what do we know of Dr. Bess- 
ner? Only what he himself gives out.” 

“But he couldn’t have hidden them in here without my 
seeing him.” 

“He could not have hidden anything today without 
your having seen him. But we do not know when the 
substitution took place. He may have effected the exchange 
1 some days ago.” 

“I never thought of that.” 

But the search was unavailing. 

The next cabin was Pennington’s. The two men spent 
ome time in their search. In particular, Poirot and Race 
examined carefully a case full of legal and business docu- 
nents, most of them requiring Linnet’s signature. 

Poirot shook his head gloomily. “These seem all square 
nd aboveboard. You agree?” 

“Absolutely. Still, the man isn’t a born fool. If there 


Death on the Nile 


238 

had been a compromising document there— a power of at- 
torney or something of that kind— he’d be pretty sure to 
have destroyed it first thing.” 

“That is so, yes.” 

Poirot lifted a heavy Colt revolver out of the top drawer 
of the chest of drawers, looked at it and put it back. 

“So it seems there are still some people who travel with 
revolvers,” he murmured. 

“Yes, a little suggestive, perhaps. Still, Linnet Doyk 
wasn’t shot with a thing that size.” Race paused and then 
said: “You know, I’ve thought of a possible answer to your 
point about the pistol being thrown overboard. Supposing 
that the actual murderer did leave it in Linnet Doyle’s J 
cabin, and that someone else— some second person— took it 
away and threw it into the river?” 

“Yes, that is possible. I have thought of it. But it opens 
up a whole string of questions. Who was that second per- 
son? What interest had they in endeavouring to shield Jac- 
queline de Belief ort by taking away the pistol? What was 
that second person doing there? The only other person we 
know of who went into the cabin was Mademoiselle Var! 
Schuyler. Was it conceivably Mademoiselle Van Schuylei' 
who removed it? Why should she wish to shield Jacqueline 
de Bellefort? And yet— what other reason can there be foi 
the removal of the pistol?” 

Race suggested, “She may have recognized the stole as 
hers, got the wind up, and thrown the whole bag of tricks 
over on that account.” 

“The stole, perhaps, but would she have got rid of the 
pistol, too? Still, I agree that it is a possible solution. But it 
is clumsy — bon Dieu, it is clumsy. And you still have not ] 
appreciated one point about the stole—” 


Death on the Nile 


239 


As they emerged from Pennington’s cabin Poirot sug- 
gested that Race should search the remaining cabins, those 
occupied by Jacqueline, Cornelia and two empty ones at 
the end, while he himself had a few words with Simon 
Doyle. 

Accordingly he retraced his steps along the deck and 
re-entered Bessner’s cabin. 

Simon said: “Look here, I’ve been thinking. I’m perfectly 
sure that those pearls were all right yesterday.” 

“Why is that, Monsieur Doyle?” 

“Because, Linnet”— he winced as he uttered his wife’s 
name— “was passing them through her hands just before 
dinner and talking about them. She knew something about 
oearls. I feel certain she’d have known if they were a 
"ake.” 

“They were a very good imitation, though. Tell me, was 
Vladame Doyle in the habit of letting those pearls out of 
ler hands? Did she ever lend them to a friend, for in- 
stance?” 

Simon flushed with slight embarrassment. 

“You see, Monsieur Poirot, it’s difficult for me to say. 

. . I— I— well, you see, I hadn’t known Linnet very 
jong.” 

“Ah, no, it was a quick romance— yours.” 

Simon went on. 

“And so— really— I shouldn’t know a thing like that. But 
■Linnet was awfully generous with her things. I should 
hink she might have done.” 

“She never for instance”— Poirot’s voice was very smooth 
-“she never, for instance, lent them to Mademoiselle de 
dellefort?” 

“What d’you mean?” Simon flushed brick red, tried to 


240 


Death on the Nile 


sit up and, wincing, fell back. “What are you getting at? 
That Jackie stole the pearls? She didn’t. I’ll swear sht 
didn’t. Jackie’s as straight as a die. The mere idea of hei 
being a thief is ridiculous— absolutely ridiculous.” 

Poirot looked at him with gently twinkling eyes. 

“Oh, la! la! la!” he said unexpectedly. “That suggestion 
of mine, it has indeed stirred up the nest of hornets.” 

Simon repeated doggedly, unmoved by Poirot’s lighter 
note, “Jackie’s straight!” 

Poirot remembered a girl’s voice by the Nile in Assuan 
saying, “I love Simon— and he loves me. . . .” 

He had wondered which of the three statements he had 
heard that night was the true one. It seemed to him that 
it had turned out to be Jacqueline who had come closest to 
the truth. 

The door opened and Race came in. 

“Nothing,” he said brusquely. “Well, we didn’t expect 
it. I see the stewards coming along with their report as to 
the searching of the passengers.” 

A steward and stewardess appeared in the doorway. The , 
former spoke first. 

“Nothing, sir.” 

“Any of the gentlemen make any fuss?” 

“Only the Italian gentleman, sir. He carried on a good 
deal. Said it was a dishonour— something of that kind. He’d 
got a gun on him, too.” 

“What kind of a gun?” 

“Mauser automatic twenty-five, sir.” 

“Italians are pretty hot-tempered,” said Simon. “Richetti 
got in no end of a stew at Wadi Haifa just because of a 
mistake over a telegram. He was darned rude to Linnet 
over it.” 


Death on the Nile 


241 

Race turned to the stewardess. She was a big handsome 
looking woman. 

“Nothing on any of the ladies, sir. They made a good 
deal of fuss— except for Mrs. Allerton, who was as nice 
as nice could be. Not a sign of the pearls. By the way, the 
young lady, Miss Rosalie Otterbourne, had a little pistol 
in her handbag.” 
j “What kind?” 

“It was a very small one, sir, with a pearl handle. A kind 
of toy.” 

Race stared. 

“Devil take this case,” he muttered. “I thought we’d got 
her cleared of suspicion, and now— Does every girl on this 
blinking boat carry around pearl-handled toy pistols? ” 

He shot a question at the stewardess. “Did she show any 
feeling over your finding it?” 

The woman shook her head. “I don’t think she noticed. 
[J had my back turned whilst I was going through the 
handbag.” 

“Still, she must have known you’d come across it. Oh, 
well, it beats me. What about the maid?” 

“We’ve looked all over the boat, sir. We can’t find her 
anywhere.” 

“What’s this?” asked Simon. 

“Mrs. Doyle’s maid— Louise Bourget. She’s disappeared.” 

I “Disappeared?” 

Race said thoughtfully: “She might have stolen the pearls. 
She is the one person who had ample opportunity to get 
a replica made.” 

“And then, when she found a search was being insti- 
tuted, she threw herself overboard?” suggested Simon. 
“Nonsense,” replied Race, irritably. “A woman can’t 


242 


Death on the Nile 


throw herself overboard in broad daylight, from a boat 
like this, without somebody realizing the fact. She’s bound I 
to be somewhere on board.” He addressed the stewardess 
once more. “When was she last seen?” 

“About half an hour before the bell went for lunch, sir.” 

“We’ll have a look at her cabin anyway,” said Race. 
“That may tell us something.” 

He led the way to the deck below. Poirot followed him. 
They unlocked the door of the cabin and passed inside. 

Louise Bourget, whose trade it was to keep other people’s 
belongings in order, had taken a holiday where her own 
were concerned. Odds and ends littered the top of the 
chest of drawers; a suitcase gaped open, with clothes hang- 
ing out of the side of it and preventing it shutting; under- 
clothing hung limply over the sides of the chairs. 

As Poirot, with swift neat fingers, opened the drawers 
of the dressing-chest, Race examined the suitcase. 

Louise’s shoes were lined along by the bed. One of them, 
a black patent leather, seemed to be resting at an extraordi- 
nary angle, almost unsupported. The appearance of it was 
so odd that it attracted Race’s attention. 

He closed the suitcase and bent over the line of shoes. 
Then he uttered a sharp exclamation. 

Poirot whirled round. 

u Qii’est ce qu’il y a?” 

Race said grimly: “She hasn’t disappeared. She’s here- 
under the bed. . . 


CHAPTER XXII 


The body of a dead woman, who in life had been 
[Louise Bourget, lay on the floor of her cabin. The two 
rien bent over it. 

Race straightened himself first. 

“Been dead close on an hour, I should say. We’ll get 
Bessner on to it. Stabbed to the heart. Death pretty well 
nstantaneous, I should imagine. She doesn’t look pretty, 
does she?” 

“No.” 

Poirot shook his head with a slight shudder. 

The dark feline face was convulsed, as though with sur- 

I prise and fuiy, the lips drawn back from the teeth. 

Poirot bent again gently and picked up the right hand. 
Something just showed within the fingers. He detached it 
md held it out to Race, a little sliver of flimsy paper 
coloured a pale mauvish pink. 

“You see what it is?” 

“Money,” said Race. 

“The corner of a thousand franc note, I fancy.” 

“Well, it’s clear what happened,” said Race. “She knew 
something— and she was blackmailing the murderer with 
her knowledge. We thought she wasn’t being quite straight 
this morning.” 

Poirot cried out: “We have been idiots— fools! We 
should have known— then. What did she say? ‘What could 
l have seen or heard? I was on the deck below. Naturally, 


244 


Death on the Nile 


if I had been unable to sleep, if I had mounted the stairs , 
then perhaps I might have seen this assassin, this monster 
enter or leave Madame’s cabin, but as it is—’ Of course j 
that is what did happen! She did come up. She did se( : 
someone gliding into Linnet Doyle’s cabin— or coming oui 
of it. And, because of her greed, her insensate greed, she 
lies here—” I 

“And we are no nearer to knowing who killed her,” fin- , 
ished Race disgustedly. 

Poirot shook his head. “No, no. We know much more 
now. We know— we know almost everything. Only whai 
we know seems incredible. ... Yet it must be so. Only 
I do not see. Pah! what a fool I was this morning! We felt 
—both of us felt— that she was keeping something back, and 
yet we never realized the logical reason, blackmail.” 

“She must have demanded hush money straight away,’ 
said Race. “Demanded it with threats. The murderer was 
forced to accede to that request and paid her in French 
notes. Anything there?” 

Poirot shook his head thoughtfully. “I hardly think so. 
Many people take a reserve of money with them when 
travelling— sometimes five pound notes, sometimes dollars, 
but very often French notes as well. Possibly the murderer 
paid her all he had in a mixture of currencies. Let us con- 
tinue our reconstruction.” 

“The murderer comes to her cabin, gives her the money, 
and then—” 

“And then,” said Poirot, “she counts it. Oh, yes, I know 
that class. She would count the money, and while she 
counted it she was completely off her guard. The mur- 
derer struck. Having done so successfully, he gathered up 
the money and fled— not noticing that the corner of one of 


/ 


Death on the Nile 


245 


he notes was torn.” 

“We may get him that way,” suggested Race doubt- 

ull y* 

“I doubt it,” said Poirot. “He will examine those notes, 
ind will probably notice the tear. Of course if he were of 
||i parsimonious disposition he would not be able to bring 
limself to destroy a mille note— but I fear— I very much 
ear that his temperament is just the opposite.” 

“How do you make that out?” 

“Both this crime and the murder of Madame Doyle de- 
nanded certain qualities— courage, audacity, bold execu- 
tion, lightning action; those qualities do not accord with 
i saving, prudent disposition.” 

Race shook his head sadly. “I’d better get Bessner down,” 
le said. 

The stout doctor’s examination did not take long. Ac- 
companied by a good many Ach’s and So’s, he went to 

I vork. 

“She has been dead not more than an hour,” he an- 
lounced. “Death it was very quick— at once.” 

“And what weapon do you think was used?” 

“Ach, it is interesting, that. It was something very sharp, 
Very thin, very delicate. I could show you the kind of 
hing.” 

Back again in his cabin he opened a case and extracted 
l long, delicate, surgical knife. 

“It was something like that, my friend; it was not a 
:ommon table knife.” 

“I suppose,” suggested Race smoothly, “that none of 
rour own knives are— er— missing, Doctor?” 

Bessner stared at him; then his face grew red with indig- 
lation. 


Death on the Nile 


246 

“What is that you say? Do you think I— I, Carl Bessnei 
—who so well-known is all over Austria— I with my clinics, 
my highly born patients— I have killed a miserable little 
jemme de chambre?! Ah, but it is ridiculous— absurd, what 1 
you say! None of my knives are missing— not one, I tell 
you. They are all here, correct, in their places. You can 
see for yourself. And this insult to my profession I will not 
forget.” 

Dr. Bessner closed his case with a snap, flung it down 
and stamped out onto the deck. 

“Whew!” said Simon. “You’ve put the old boy’s back 
up.” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. “It is regrettable.” 

“You’re on the wrong tack. Old Bessner’s one of the 
best, even though he is a kind of Boche.” 

Dr. Bessner reappeared suddenly. 

“Will you be so kind as to leave me now my cabin? I 
have to do the dressing of my patient’s leg.” 

Miss Bowers had entered with him and stood, brisk and 
professional, waiting for the others to go. 

Race and Poirot crept out meekly. Race muttered some- 
thing and went off. Poirot turned to his left. He heard 
scraps of girlish conversation, a little laugh. Jacqueline and 
Rosalie were together in the latter’s cabin. 

The door was open and the two girls were standing near 
it. As his shadow fell on them they looked up. He saw 
Rosalie Otterbourne smile at him for the first time— a shy 
welcoming smile— a little uncertain in its lines, as of one 
who does a new and unfamiliar thing. 

“You talk the scandal, Mesdemoiselles?” he accused 
them. 

“No, indeed,” said Rosalie. “As a matter of fact we were 


Death on the Nile 


H7 


ust comparing lipsticks.” 

Poirot smiled. “Les chiffons d’aujourd'hui” he mur- 
nured. 

But there was something a little mechanical about his 
mile, and Jacqueline de Bellefort, quicker and more ob- 
;ervant than Rosalie, saw it. She dropped the lipstick she 
vas holding and came out upon the deck. 

“Has something— what has happened now?” 

“It is as you guess, Mademoiselle; something has hap- 
pened.” 

“What?” Rosalie came out too. 

“Another death,” said Poirot. 

Rosalie caught her breath sharply. Poirot was watching 
aer narrowly. He saw alarm and something more— con- 
sternation— show for a minute or two in her eyes. 

“Madame Doyle’s maid has been killed,” he told them 
bluntly. 

“Killed?” cried Jacqueline. u Killed, do you say?” 

! “Yes, that is what I said.” Though his answer was 
lominally to her, it was Rosalie whom he watched. It was 
Rosalie to whom he spoke as he went on: “You see, this 
baaid she saw something she was not intended to see. And 
iso— she was silenced, in case she should not hold her 
:ongue.” 

“What was it she saw?” 

Again it was Jacqueline who asked, and agkin Poirot’s 
inswer was to Rosalie. It was an odd little three-cornered 
>;cene. 

“There is, I think, very little doubt what it was she saw,” 
said Poirot. “She saw someone enter and leave Linnet 
Doyle’s cabin on that fatal night.” 

i His ears were quick. He heard the sharp intake of breath 


Death on the Nile 


248 


and saw the eyelids flicker. Rosalie Otterbonrne had re 
acted just as he had intended she should. 

“Did she say who it was she saw?” Rosalie asked. 
Gently— regretfully— Poirot shook his head. 

Footsteps pattered up the deck. It was Cornelia Robsor 
her eyes wide and startled. 

‘Oh, Jacqueline,” she cried, “something awful has hap , 


pened! Another dreadful thing! 

Jacqueline turned to her. The two moved a few step 
forward. Almost unconsciously Poirot and Rosalie Otter 
bourne moved in the other direction. 

Rosalie said sharply: “Why do you look at me? Wha 
have you got in your mind?” 

“That is two questions you ask me. I will ask you onh 
one in return. Why do you not tell me all the truth 
Mademoiselle?” 

“I don’t know what you mean. I told you— everything 
—this morning.” 

“No, there were things you did not tell me. You die 
not tell me that you carry about in your handbag a small 
calibre pistol with a pearl handle. You did not tell me al 
that you saw last night.” 

She flushed. Then she said sharply: “It’s quite untrue 
I haven’t got a revolver.” 

“I did not say a revolver. I said a small pistol that yoi 
carry about in your handbag.” 

She wheeled round, darted into her cabin and out agair 
and thrust her grey leather handbag into his hands. 

“You’re talking nonsense. Look for yourself if you like.’ 

Poirot opened the bag. There was no pistol inside. 

He handed the bag back to her, meeting her scornful 
triumphant glance. 


Death on the Nile 


249 


“No,” he said pleasantly. “It is not there.” 

“You see. You’re not always right, Monsieur Poirot. And 
pau’re wrong about that other ridiculous thing you said.” 
“No, I do not think so.” 

h “You’re infuriating!” She stamped an angry foot. “You 
bt an idea into your head, and you go on and on and on 
oout it.” 

“Because I want you to tell me the truth.” 

“What is the truth? You seem to know it better than I 

L 55 

It). 

Poirot said: “You want me to tell what it was you saw? 
Li I am right, will you admit that I am right? I will tell 
i’ou my little idea. I think that when you came round the 
jern of the boat you stopped involuntarily because you 
few a man come out of a cabin about half way down the 
[bck— Linnet Doyle’s cabin, as you realized next day. You 
:w him come out, close the door behind him, and walk 
(way from you down the deck and— perhaps— enter one 
if the two end cabins. Now then, am I right, Mademoi- 
: lie? ” 

She did not answer. 

Poirot said: “Perhaps you think it wiser not to speak, 
t’erhaps you are afraid that, if you do, you too will be 
lied.” 

For a moment he thought she had risen to the easy bait, 
nat the accusation against her courage would succeed 
• here more subtle arguments would have failed. 

Her lips opened— trembled— then, “I saw no one,” said 
osalie Otterbourne. 


CHAPTER XXIII 


Miss Bowers came out of Dr. Bessner’s cabin, smooth 
mg her cuffs over her wrists. 

Jacqueline left Cornelia abruptly and accosted the hos 
pital nurse. 

“How is he?” she demanded. 

Poirot came up in time to hear the answer. Miss Bowei 
was looking rather worried. 

“Things aren’t going too badly,” she said. 

Jacqueline cried, “You mean, he’s worse?” 

“Well, I must say I shall be relieved when we get ii 
and can get a proper X-ray done and the whole thin; 
cleaned up under an anaesthetic. When do you think w 
shall get to Shellal, Monsieur Poirot?” 

“Tomorrow morning.” 

Miss Bowers pursed her lips and shook her head. 

“It’s very unfortunate. We are doing all we can, bu 
there’s always such a danger of septicaemia.” 

Jacqueline caught Miss Bowers’ arm and shook it. 

“Is he going to die? Is he going to die?” 

“Dear me, no, Miss de Bellefort. That is, I hope not, I’n 
sure. The wound in itself isn’t dangerous, but there’s m 
doubt it ought to be X-rayed as soon as possible. And then 
of course, poor Mr. Doyle ought to have been kept abso 
lutely quiet today. He’s had far too much worry and exi 
citement. No wonder his temperature is rising. What witl 
the shock of his wife’s death, and one thing and another-' 

250 


Death on the Nile 


251 


Jacqueline relinquished her grasp of the nurse’s arm and 
timed away. She stood leaning over the side, her back to 
he other two. 

“What I say is, we’ve got to hope for the best always,” 
lid Miss Bowers. “Of course Mr. Doyle has a very strong 
onstitution— one can see that— probably never had a day’s 
Jness in his life. So that’s in his favour. But there’s no de- 
ying that this rise in temperature is a nasty sign and—” 

She shook her head, adjusted her cuffs once more, and 
loved briskly away. 

Jacqueline turned and walked gropingly, blinded by 
sars, toward her cabin. A hand below her elbow steadied 
nd guided her. She looked up through the tears to find 
'oirot by her side. She leaned on him a little and he 
uided her through the cabin door. 

i She sank down on the bed and the tears came more 
reely, punctuated by great shuddering sobs, 
j “He’ll die! He’ll die! I know he’ll die. . . . And I shall 
ave killed him. Yes, I shall have killed him. . . .” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. He shook his head a little, 
idly. 

“Mademoiselle, what is done, is done. One cannot take 
ack the accomplished action. It is too late to regret.” 

She cried out more vehemently: “I shall have killed him! 
aid I love him so ... I love him so.” 

Poirot sighed. “Too much. . . .” 

It had been his thought long ago in the restaurant of 
I. Blondin. It was his thought again now. 

He said, hesitating a little: “Do not, at all events, go by 
'hat Miss Bowers says. Hospital nurses, me, I find them 
(ways gloomy! The night nurse, always, she is astonished 
) find her patient alive in the evening; the day nurse, al- 


252 


Death on the Nile 


ways, she is surprised to find him alive in the morning 
They know too much, you see, of the possibilities tha 
may arise. When one is motoring one might easily say t( 
oneself, ‘If a car came out from that crossroad— or if tha 
lorry backed suddenly— or if the wheel came off the cai 
that is approaching me— or if a dog jumped off the hedgt 
onto my driving arm — eh bien, I should probably be killed! 
But one assumes, and usually rightly, that none of thest 
things will happen, and that one will get to one’s jour 
ney’s end. But if, of course, one has been in an accident 
or seen one or more accidents, then one is inclined to tak< 
the opposite point of view.” 

Jacqueline asked, half smiling through her tears, “Ar< 
you trying to console me, Monsieur Poirot?” 

“The Bon Dieu knows what I am trying to do! Yot 
should not have come on this journey.” 

“No— I wish I hadn’t. It’s been— so awful. But— it will b< 
soon over now.” 

“ Mais oui—mais oui .” 

“And Simon will go to the hospital, and they’ll give th< 
proper treatment and everything will be all right.” 

“You speak like the child! ‘And they lived happily eve.' 
afterward.’ That is it, is it not?” 

She flushed suddenly scarlet. 

“Monsieur Poirot, I never meant— never— ” 

“It is too soon to think of such a thing! That is th< 
proper hypocritical thing to say, is it not? But you art 
partly a Latin, Mademoiselle Jacqueline. You should b< 
able to admit facts even if they do not sound very decor 
ous. he roi est mort—vrve le roi! The sun has gone anc 
the moon rises. That is so, is it not? ” 

“You don’t understand. He’s just sorry for me— awfullj 


Death on the Nile 


253 

orry for me, because he knows how terrible it is for me 

0 know I’ve hurt him so badly.” 

“Ah, well,” said Poirot. “The pure pity, it is a very 
bfty sentiment.” 

He looked at her half mockingly, half with some other 
motion. 

He murmured softly under his breath words in French: 

1 

“La vie est vaine. 

, Un pen dC amour, 

JJn peu de haine, 

Et puis bonjour. 

La vie est breve. 

Un peu d'espoir, 

Un peu de reve, 

Et puis bonsoirP 

He went out again onto the deck. Colonel Race was 
Tiding along the deck and hailed him at once. 

“Poirot. Good man! I want you. I’ve got an idea.” 

1 Thrusting his arm through Poirot’s he walked him up 
[he deck. 

“Just a chance remark of Doyle’s. I hardly noticed it at 
| le time. Something about a telegram.” 

\ “ Tiens—c 1 est vraiP 

“Nothing in it, perhaps, but one can’t leave any avenue 
nexplored. Damn it all, man, two murders, and we’re still 
i the dark.” 

Poirot shook his head. “No, not in the dark. In the light.” 
Race looked at him curiously. “You have an idea?” 

“It is more than an idea now. / am sureP 
“Since— when?” 

“Since the death of the maid, Louise Bourget.” 


254 Death on the Nile 

“Damned if I see it!” 

“My friend, it is so clear— so clear. Only there are diffi 
culties— embarrassments— impediments! See you, around : 
person like Linnet Doyle there is so much— so many con 
dieting hates and jealousies and envies and meannesses. I 
is like a cloud of flies, buzzing, buzzing. . . .” 

“But you think you know?” The other looked at hin; 
curiously. “You wouldn’t say so unless you were sure 
Can’t say I’ve any real light, myself. I’ve suspicions, o 
course. . . .” 

Poirot stopped. He laid an impressive hand on Race’ 
arm. 

“You are a great man, mon Colonel. . . . You do no 
say ‘Tell me. What is it that you think?’ You know tha 
if I could speak now I would. But there is much to b( 
cleared away first. But think, think for a moment alonj 
the lines that I shall indicate. There are certain points. . . 
There is the statement of Mademoiselle de Bellefort tha 
someone overheard our conversation that night in the gar 
den at Assuan. There is the statement of Monsieur Tin 
Allerton as to what he heard and did on the night of thi 
crime. There are Louise Bourget’s significant answers t< 
our questions this morning. There is the fact that Madam 
Allerton drinks water, that her son drinks whisky an< 
soda and that I drink wine. Add to that the fact of tw< 
bottles of nail polish and the proverb I quoted. And finalh 
we come to the crux of the whole business, the fact tha 
the pistol was wrapped up in a cheap handkerchief and i 
velvet stole and thrown overboard. . . .” 

Race was silent a minute or two then he shook his head 

“No,” he said, “I don’t see it. Mind, I’ve got a fain 
idea what you’re driving at, but as far as I can see, i 


Death on the Nile 


2 55 


loesn’t work.” 

“But yes— but yes. You are seeing only half the truth. 
Vnd remember this— we must start again from the begui- 
ling, since our first conception was entirely wrong.” 

Race made a slight grimace. 

“I’m used to that. It often seems to me that’s all de- 
ective work is, wiping out your false starts and begui- 
ling again.” 

“Yes, it is very true, that. And it is just what some people 
yill not do. They conceive a certain theory, and every- 
hing has to fit into that theory. If one little fact will not 
it it, they throw it aside. But it is always the facts that 
yill not fit in that are significant. All along I have realized 
he significance of that pistol being removed from the 
icene of the crime. I knew that it meant something, but 
yhat that something was I only realized one little half 
lour ago.” 

“And I still don’t see it!” 

“But you will! Only reflect along the lines I indicated. 
j\nd now let us clear up this matter of a telegram. That is, 
f the Herr Doktor will admit us.” 

Dr. Bessner was still in a very bad humour. In answer to 
heir knock he disclosed a scowling face. 

“What is it? Once more you wish to see my patient? 
But I tell you it is not wise. He has fever. He has had 
nore than enough excitement today.” 

“Just one question,” said Race. “Nothing more, I assure 
^ou.” 

With an unwilling grunt the doctor moved aside and the 
wo men entered the cabin. Dr. Bessner, growling to him- 
self, pushed past them. 

“I return in three minutes,” he said. “And then— posi- 


Death on the Nile 


256 

tively— yon go!” 

They heard him stumping down the deck. 

Simon Doyle looked from one to the other of them in 
quiringly. 

“Yes,” he said, “what is it?” 

“A very little thing,” Race replied. “Just now, when th 
stewards were reporting to me, they mentioned that Signo 
Richetti had been particularly troublesome. You said tha 
that didn’t surprise you, as you knew he had a bad tempei 
and that he had been rude to your wife over some matte 
of a telegram. Now can you tell me about that incident? 1 

“Easily. It was at Wadi Haifa. We’d just come back fron 
the Second Cataract. Linnet thought she saw a telegran 
for her sticking up on the board. She’d forgotten, you see 
that she wasn’t called Ridgeway any longer, and Richett 
and Ridgeway do look rather alike when written in ai 
atrocious handwriting. So she tore it open, couldn’t maki 
head or tail of it, and was puzzling over it when this fellov 
Richetti came along, fairly tore it out of her hand anc 
gibbered with rage. She went after him to apologize anc 
he was frightfully rude to her about it.” 

Race drew a deep breath. “And do you know at all 
Mr. Doyle, what was in that telegram? ” 

“Yes, Linnet read part of it out aloud. It said—” 

He paused. There was a commotion outside. A high- 
pitched voice was rapidly approaching. 

“Where are Monsieur Poirot and Colonel Race? I musi 
see them immediately ! It is most important. I have vital in- 
formation. I— Are they with Mr. Doyle?” 

Bessner had not closed the door. Only the curtain hung 
across the open doorway. Mrs. Otterbourne swept it tc 
one side and entered like a tornado. Her face was suffused 


Death on the Nile 257 

with colour, her gait slightly unsteady, her command of 
words not quite under her control. 

“Mr. Doyle,” she said dramatically, “I know who killed 
ymur wife!” 

“What?” 

1 Simon stared at her. So did the other two. 

Mrs. Otterboume swept all three of them with a tri- 
umphant glance. She was happy— superbly happy. 

“Yes,” she said. “My theories are completely vindicated. 
The deep, primeval, primordial urges— it may appear im- 
possible— fantastic— but it is the truth!” 

Race said sharply, “Do I understand that you have evi- 
dence in your possession to show who killed Mrs. Doyle? ” 

Mrs. Otterbourne sat down in a chair and leaned for- 
ward, nodding her head vigorously. 

“Certainly I have. You will agree, will you not, that 
whoever killed Louise Bourget also killed Linnet Doyle— 
that the two crimes were committed by one and the 
same hand?” 

“Yes, yes,” said Simon impatiently. “Of course. That 
stands to reason. Go on.” 

“Then my assertion holds. I know who killed Louise 
Bourget; therefore I know who killed Linnet Doyle.” 

“You mean, you have a theory as to who killed Louise 
Bourget,” suggested Race sceptically. 

Mrs. Otterbourne turned on him like a tiger. 

“No, I have exact knowledge. I saw the person with my 
own eyes.” 

Simon, fevered, shouted out: “For God’s sake, start at 
the beginning. You know the person who killed Louise 
Bourget, you say.” 

Mrs. Otterbourne nodded. 


Death on the Nile 


258 

“I will tell you exactly what occurred.” 

Yes, she was very happy— no doubt of it! This was he 
moment, her triumph! What of it if her books were f ailin g 
to sell, if the stupid public that once had bought them an 
devoured them voraciously now turned to newer favou 
rites? Salome Otterbourne would once again be notorious 
Her name would be in all the papers. She would be princi 
pal witness for the prosecution at the trial. 

She took a deep breath and opened her mouth. 

“It was when I went down to lunch. I hardly felt lik 
eating— all the horror of the recent tragedy— Well, 
needn’t go into that. Half way down I remember that 
had— er— left something in my cabin. I told Rosalie to go 01 
without me. She did.” 

Mrs. Otterbourne paused a minute. 

The curtain across the door moved slightly as thougl 
lifted by the wind, but none of the three men noticed it 

“I— er— ” Mrs. Otterbourne paused. Thin ice to skate 
over here, but it must be done somehow. “I— er— had ar 
arrangement with one of the— er — personnel of the ship. Ht 
was to— er— get me something I needed, but I did not wisl 
my daughter to know of it. She is inclined to be tiresome 
in certain ways—” 

Not too good, this, but she could think of something 
that sounded better before it came to telling the story ir 
court. 

Race’s eyebrows lifted as his eyes asked a question ol 
Poirot. 

Poirot gave an infinitesimal nod. His lips formed the 
word, “Drink.” 

The curtain across the door moved again. Between it anc 
the door itself something showed with a faint steel blue 


Death on the Nile 


259 


jleam. 

Mrs. Otterbourne continued: “The arrangement was 
that I should go round to the stern on the deck below this, 
tnd there I should find the man waiting for me. As I went 
ilong the deck a cabin door opened and somebody looked 
but. It was this girl— Louise Bourget, or whatever her name 
s. She seemed to be expecting someone. When she saw it 
vas me, she looked disappointed and went abruptly inside 
igain. I didn’t think anything of it, of course. I went along 
ust as I had said I would and got the— the stuff from the 
nan. I paid him and— er— just had a word with him. Then 

started back. Just as I came around the corner I saw 
[ tomeone knock on the maid’s door and go into the cabin.” 

Race said, “And that person was—” 

Bang! 

The noise of the explosion filled the cabin. There was 
in acrid sour smell of smoke. Mrs. Otterbourne turned 
;lowly sideways, as though in supreme inquiry, then her 
body slumped forward and she fell to the ground with a 
:rash. From just behind her ear the blood flowed from a 
•ound neat hole. 

There was a moment’s stupefied silence. Then both the 
ible-bodied men jumped to their feet. The woman’s body 
lindered their movements a little. Race bent over her while 
Poirot made a catlike jump for the door and the deck. 

The deck was empty. On the ground just in front of the 
;ill lay a big Colt revolver. 

Poirot glanced in both directions. The deck was empty, 
fde then sprinted toward the stern. As he rounded the 
borner he ran into Tim Allerton, who was coming full 
tilt from the opposite direction. 

“What the devil was that?” cried Tim breathlessly. 


260 Death on the Nile 

Poirot said sharply, “Did you meet anyone on your waj 
here?” 

“Meet anyone? No.” 

“Then come with me.” He took the young man by thi 
arm and retraced his steps. A little crowd had assemblet 
by now. Rosalie, Jacqueline and Cornelia had rushed ou 
of their cabins. More people were coming along the decl 
from the saloon— Ferguson, Jim Fanthorp and Mrs. Aller 
ton. 

Race stood by the revolver. Poirot turned his head an< 
said sharply to Tim Allerton, “Got any gloves in you 
pocket?” 

Tim fumbled. 

“Yes, I have.” 

Poirot seized them from him, put them on, and bent t< 
examine the revolver. Race did the same. The other 
watched breathlessly. 

Race said: “He didn’t go the other way. Fanthorp an< 
Ferguson were sitting on this deck lounge; they’d hav 
seen him.” 

Poirot responded, “And Mr. Allerton would have me 
him if he’d gone aft.” 

Race said, pointing to the revolver: “Rather fancy we’v 
seen this not so very long ago. Must make sure, though. 

He knocked on the door of Pennington’s cabin. Ther 
was no answer. The cabin was empty. Race strode to th 
right hand drawer of the chest and jerked it open. Th 
revolver was gone. 

“Settles that,” said Race. “Now then, where’s Penning 
ton himself?” 

They went out again on deck. Mrs. Allerton had joinei 
the group. Poirot moved swiftly over to her. 


Death on the Nile 


261 


“Madame, take Miss Otterbourne with you and look 
ifter her. Her mother has been”— he consulted Race with 
in eye and Race nodded— “killed.” 

Dr. Bessner came bustling along. 

“Gott im Himmel! What is there now?” 

They made way for him. Race indicated the cabin. 
Sessner went inside. 

“Find Pennington,” said Race. “Any fingerprints on that 
evolver?” 

“None,” said Poirot. 

They found Pennington on the deck below. He was 
itting in the little drawing-room writing letters. He lifted 
H handsome, clean-shaven face. 

“Anything new?” he asked. 

“Didn’t you hear a shot?” 

“Why— now you mention it— I believe I did hear a kind 
)f a bang. But I never dreamed— Who’s been shot?” 

“Mrs. Otterbourne.” 

“Mrs. Otterbourne ?' 1 ' 1 Pennington sounded quite as- 
ounded. “Well, you do surprise me. Mrs. Otterbourne.” 
"ie shook his head. “I can’t see that at all.” He lowered his 
mice. “Strikes me, gentlemen, we’ve got a homicidal 
naniac aboard. We ought to organize a defence system.” 

“Mr. Pennington,” said Race, “how long have you been 
n this room?” 

“Why, let me see.” Mr. Pennington gently rubbed his 
:hin. “I should say a matter of twenty minutes or so.” 

“And you haven’t left it?” 

“Why no— certainly not.” 

He looked inquiringly at the two men. 

“You see, Mr. Pennington,” said Race, “Mrs. Otter- 
»ourne was shot with your revolver.” 


CHAPTER XXIV 



Mr. Pennington was shocked. Mr. Pennington couli 
hardly believe it. 

“Why, gentlemen,” he said, “this is a very serious matter 
Very serious indeed.” 

“Extremely serious for you, Mr. Pennington.” 

“For me?” Pennington’s eyebrows rose in startled sur- 
prise. “But, my dear sir, I was sitting quietly writing ir 
here when that shot was fired.” 

“You have, perhaps, a witness to prove that?” 

Pennington shook his head. 

“Why, no— I wouldn’t say that. But it’s clearly impos- 
sible that I should have gone to the deck above, shot thi: 
poor woman (and why should I shoot her anyway?) anc 
come down again with no one seeing me. There are alway; 
plenty of people on the deck lounge this time of day.” 

“How do you account for your pistol being used?” 

“Well— I’m afraid I may be to blame there. Quite soor 
after getting aboard there was a conversation in the saloor 
one evening, I remember, about firearms, and I mentionec 
then that I always carried a revolver with me when ] 
travel.” 

“Who was there?” 

“Well, I can’t remember exactly. Most people, I think 
Quite a crowd, anyway.” 

He shook his head gently. 

“Why, yes,” he said. “I am certainly to blame there.’ 

262 


Death on the Nile 263 

He went on: “First Linnet, then Linnet’s maid, and now 
drs. Otterbourne. There seems no reason in it all!” 

“There was reason,” said Race. 

“There was?” 

“Yes. Mrs. Otterbourne was on the point of telling us 
hat she had seen a certain person go into Louise’s cabin, 
before she could name that person she was shot dead.” 

Andrew Pennington passed a fine silk handkerchief over 
lis brow. 

“All this is terrible,” he murmured. 

Poirot said: “Monsieur Pennington, I would like to dis- 
miss certain aspects of the case with you. Will you come 
>o my cabin in half an hour’s time?” 

“I should be delighted.” 

Pennington did not sound delighted. He did not look 
lelighted either. Race and Poirot exchanged glances and 
| Ten abruptly left the room. 

: “Cunning old devil,” said Race, “but he’s afraid. Eh?” 

Poirot nodded. “Yes, he is not happy, our Monsieur 
Ynnington.” 

As they reached the promenade deck again, Mrs. Ailer- 
on came out of her cabin and, seeing Poirot, beckoned 
lim imperiously. 

11 “Madame?” 

“That poor child! Tell me, Monsieur Poirot, is there a 
I louble cabin somewhere that I could share with her? She 
mghtn’t to go back to the one she shared with her mother, 
find mine is only a single one.” 

“That can be arranged, Madame. It is very good of 
./ou.” 

“It’s mere decency. Besides, I’m very fond of the girl, 
’ve always liked her.” 


Death on the Nile 


264 

“Is she very upset?” 

“Terribly. She seems to have been absolutely devoted t< 
that odious woman. That is what is so pathetic about it all 
Tim says he believes she drank. Is that true?” 

Poirot nodded. 

“Oh, well, poor woman, one mustn’t judge her, I sup 
pose; but that girl must have had a terrible life.” 

“She did, Madame. She is very proud and she was ver 
loyal.” 

“Yes, I like that— loyalty, I mean. It’s out of fashioi 
nowadays. She’s an odd character, that girl— proud, re 
served, stubborn, and terribly warm-hearted underneath, 
fancy.” 

“I see that I have given her into good hands, Madame.' 

“Yes, don’t worry. I’ll look after her. She’s inclined t< 
cling to me in the most pathetic fashion.” 

Mrs. Allerton went back into the cabin. Poirot returnei 
to the scene of the tragedy. 

Cornelia was still standing on the deck, her eyes wide 
She said: “I don’t understand, Monsieur Poirot. How di< > 
the person who shot her get away without our seeing him? : 

“Yes, how?” echoed Jacqueline. 

“Ah,” said Poirot, “it was not quite such a disappearing 
trick as you think, Mademoiselle. There were three dis 
tinct ways the murderer might have gone.” 

Jacqueline looked puzzled. She said, “Three?” 

“He might have gone to the right, or he might have gom 
to the left, but I don’t see any other way,” puzzler 
Cornelia. 

Jacqueline too frowned. Then her brow cleared. 

She said: “Of course. He could move in two direction 
on one plane, but he could go at right angles to tha 


Death on the Nile 265 

lane too. That is, he couldn’t go up very well, but he 
ould go down.” 

Poirot smiled. “You have brains, Mademoiselle.” 

Cornelia said, “I know I’m just a plain mutt, but I still 
on’t see.” 

Jacqueline said, “Monsieur Poirot means, darling, that he 
ould swing himself over the rail and down onto the deck 
elow.” 

“My!” gasped Cornelia. “I never thought of that. He’d 
ave to be mighty quick about it, though. I suppose he 
ould just do it?” 

“He could do it easily enough,” said Tim Allerton. “Re- 
lember, there’s always a minute of shock after a thing 
ke this. One hears a shot and one’s too paralysed to move 
ar a second or two.” 

“That was your experience, Monsieur Allerton?” 

“Yes, it was. I just stood like a dummy for quite five 
sconds. Then I fairly sprinted round the deck.” 

Race came out of Bessner’s cabin and said authorita- 
ively: “Would you mind all clearing off? We want to 
ring out the body.” 

Everyone moved away obediently. Poirot went with 
hem. Cornelia said to him with sad earnestness: “I’ll never 
orget this trip as long as I live. Three deaths. . . . It’s 
hst like living in a nightmare.” 

Ferguson overheard her. He said aggressively: “That’s 
ecause you’re overcivilized. You should look on death 
s the Oriental does. It’s a mere incident— hardly notice- 
ble.” 

“That’s all very well,” Cornelia said. “They’re not edu- 
ated, poor creatures.” 

1 “No, and a good thing too. Education has devitalized the 


266 


Death on the Nile 


white races. Look at America— goes in for an orgy of cui 
ture. Simply disgusting.” 

“I think you’re talking nonsense,” said Cornelia flushing 
“I attend lectures every winter on Greek Art and th< 
Renaissance, and I went to some on Famous Women o: 
History.” 

Mr. Ferguson groaned in agony. “Greek Art! Renais 
sance! Famous Women of History! It makes me quite sicl 
to hear you. It’s the future that matters, woman, not th( 
past. Three women are dead on this boat. Well, what o: 
it? They’re no loss! Linnet Doyle and her money! Th< 
French maid— a domestic parasite. Mrs. Otterbourne— a use 
less fool of a woman. Do you think anyone really care: 
whether they’re dead or not? / don’t. I think it’s a damnec 
good thing!” 

“Then you’re wrong!” Cornelia blazed out at him. “Anc 
it makes me sick to hear you talk and talk, as though no 
body mattered but you. I didn’t like Mrs. Otterbounw 
much, but her daughter was ever so fond of her, and she’; 
all broken up over her mother’s death. I don’t know mucl 
about the French maid, but I expect somebody was font 
of her somewhere; and as for Linnet Doyle— well, apar 
from everything else, she was just lovely! She was so beau- 
tiful when she came into a room that it made a lump com< 
in your throat. I’m homely myself, and that makes mt 
appreciate beauty a lot more. She was as beautiful— just a; 
a woman— as anything in Greek Art. And when anything 
beautiful’s dead, it’s a loss to the world. So there!” 

Mr. Ferguson stepped back a space. He caught hold oi 
his hair with both hands and tugged at it vehemently. 

“I give it up,” he said. “You’re unbelievable. Just haven’t 
got a bit of natural female spite in you anywhere.” H< 




Death on the Nile 


267 

urned to Poirot. “Do you know, sir, that Cornelia’s father 
/as practically ruined by Linnet Ridgeway’s old man? 
>ut does the girl gnash her teeth when she sees the heiress 
ailing about in pearls and Paris models? No, she just bleats 
iut, ‘Isn’t she beautiful?’ like a blessed Baa Lamb. I don’t 
•elieve she even felt sore at her.” 

Cornelia flushed. “1 did— just for a minute. Poppa kind 
if died of discouragement, you know, because he hadn’t 
nade good.” 

1 “Felt sore for a minute! I ask you.” 

Cornelia flashed round on him. 

“Well, didn’t you say just now it was the future that 
nattered, not the past? All that was in the past, wasn’t it? 
jt’s over.” 

“Got me there,” said Ferguson. “Cornelia Robson, you’re 
he only nice woman I’ve ever come across. Will you marry 
me?” 

“Don’t be absurd.” 

“It’s a genuine proposal— even if it is made in the presence 
Iff Old Man Sleuth. Anyway, you’re a witness, Monsieur 
?oirot. I’ve deliberately offered marriage to this female— 
igainst all my principles, because I don’t believe in legal 
contracts between the sexes; but I don’t think she’d stand 
or anything else, so marriage it shall be. Come on, Cor- 
lelia, say yes.” 

“I think you’re utterly ridiculous,” said Cornelia 
lushing. 

“Why won’t you marry me?” 

1 “You’re not serious,” said Cornelia. 

“Do you mean not serious in proposing or do you mean 
lot serious in character? ” 

“Both, but I really meant character. You laugh at all sorts 


268 


Death on the Nile 




of serious things. Education and Culture— and— and Death. 
You wouldn’t be reliable .” 

She broke off, flushed again, and hurried along into her 
cabin. 

Ferguson stared after her. “Damn the girl! I believe she 
really means it. She wants a man to be reliable. Reliable- 
ye gods!” He paused and then said curiously: “What’s the 
matter with you, Monsieur Poirot? You seem very deep in 
thought.” 

Poirot roused himself with a start. 

“I reflect, that is all. I reflect.” 

“Meditation on Death. Death, the Recurring Decimal, 
by Hercule Poirot. One of his well-known monographs.’ 

“Monsieur Ferguson,” said Poirot, “you are a very im- 
pertinent young man.” 

“You must excuse me. I like attacking established insti- 
tutions.” 

“And I am an established institution?” 

“Precisely. What do you think of that girl?” 

“Of Miss Robson?” 

“Yes.” 

“I think that she has a great deal of character.” 

“You’re right. She’s got spirit. She looks meek, but she 
isn’t. She’s got guts. She’s— oh, damn it, I want that girl 
It mightn’t be a bad move if I tackled the old lady. If 1 
could once get her thoroughly against me, it might cut some 
ice with Cornelia.” 

He wheeled and went into the observation saloon. Mis: 
Van Schuyler was seated in her usual corner. She lookec 
even more arrogant than usual. She was knitting. Fergusor 
strode up to her. Hercule Poirot, entering unobtrusively 
took a seat a discreet distance away and appeared to bt 


Death on the Nile 


269 


tbsorbed in a magazine. 

“Good-afternoon, Miss Van Schuyler.” 

Miss Van Schuyler raised her eyes for a bare second, 
Iropped them again and murmured frigidly, “Er— good- 
tfternoon.” 

“Look here, Miss Van Schuyler, I want to talk to you 
ibout something pretty important. It’s just this. I want to 
harry your cousin.” 

Miss Van Schuyler’s ball of wool dropped onto the 
ground and ran wildly across the saloon. 

She said, in a venomous tone, “You must be out of your 
;enses, young man.” 

“Not at all. I’m determined to marry her. I’ve asked 
her to marry me!” 

Miss Van Schuyler surveyed him coldly, with the kind 
)f speculative interest she might have accorded to an odd 
;ort of beetle. 

“Indeed? And I presume she sent you about your busi- 
ness.” 

“She refused me.” 

' “Naturally.” 

“Not ‘naturally’ at all. I’m going to go on asking her 
ill she agrees.” 

“I can assure you, sir, that I shall take steps to see that 
ny young cousin is not subjected to any such persecu- 
tion,” said Miss Van Schuyler in a biting tone. 

“What have you got against me?” 

! Miss Van Schuyler merely raised her eyebrows and gave 
]i vehement tug to her wool, preparatory to regaining it 
ind closing the interview. 

“Come now,” persisted Mr. Ferguson, “what have you 
^ot against me?” 


270 


Death on the Nile 


“I should think that was quite obvious, Mr.— er— I don’i 
know your name.” 

“Ferguson.” 

“Mr. Ferguson.” Miss Van Schuyler uttered the name 
with definite distaste. “Any such idea is quite out of the 
question.” 

“You mean,” said Ferguson, “that Fm not good enougl 
for her?” 

“I should think that would have been obvious to you.’ 

“In what way am I not good enough?” 

Miss Van Schuyler again did not answer. 

“I’ve got two legs, two arms, good health and quite rea- 
sonable brains. What’s wrong with that?” 

“There is such a thing as social position, Mr. Ferguson.’ 

“Social position is bunk!” 

The door swung open and Cornelia came in. She stopped 
dead on seeing her redoubtable Cousin Marie in conversa- 
tion with her would-be suitor. 

The outrageous Mr. Ferguson turned his head, grinned 
broadly and called out: “Come along, Cornelia. I’m asking 
for your hand in marriage in the best conventional 
manner.” 

“Cornelia,” said Miss Van Schuyler, and her voice was 
truly awful in quality, “ have you encouraged this young 
man?” 

“I— no, of course not— at least— not exactly— I mean—” 

“What do you mean?” 

“She hasn’t encouraged me,” said Mr. Ferguson help- 
fully. “I’ve done it all. She hasn’t actually pushed me in the 
face, because she’s got too kind a heart. Cornelia, your 
cousin says I’m not good enough for you. That, of course, 
is true, but not in the way she means it. My moral nature 


Death on the Nile 


271 

:ertainly doesn’t equal yours, but her point is that I’m 
lopelessly below you socially.” 

“That, I think, is equally obvious to Cornelia,” said 
Vliss Van Schuyler. 

“Is it?” Mr. Ferguson looked at her searchingly. “Is 
:hat why you won’t marry me?” 

“No, it isn’t.” Cornelia flushed. “If— if I liked you, I’d 
narry you no matter who you were.” 

“But you don’t like me?” 

“I— I think you’re just outrageous. The way you say 
rhings . . . The things you say . . . I— I’ve never met 
myone the least like you. I—” 

Tears threatened to overcome her. She rushed from the 
room. 

“On the whole,” said Mr. Ferguson, “that’s not too bad 
for a start.” He leaned back in his chair, gazed at the ceil- 
ing, whistled, crossed his disreputable knees and remarked, 
“I’ll be calling you Cousin yet.” 

Miss Van Schuyler trembled with rage. “Leave this 
room at once, sir, or I’ll ring for the steward.” 

“I’ve paid for my ticket,” said Mr. Ferguson. “They 
can’t possibly turn me out of the public lounge. But I’ll 
humour you.” He sang softly, “Yo ho ho, and a bottle of 
rum.” Rising, he sauntered nonchalantly to the door and 
passed out. 

Choking with anger Miss Van Schuyler struggled to her 
feet. Poirot, discreetly emerging from retirement behind his 
magazine, sprang up and retrieved the ball of wool. 

“Thank you, Monsieur Poirot. If you would send Miss 
Bowers to me— I feel quite upset— that insolent young man.” 

“Rather eccentric, I’m afraid,” said Poirot. “Most of that 
family are. Spoilt, of course. Always inclined to tilt at 


2j2 Death on the Nile 

windmills.” He added carelessly, “Yon recognized him, ] 
suppose?” 

“Recognized him?” 

“Calls himself Ferguson and won’t use his title because 
of his advanced ideas.” 

“His title?” Miss Van Schuyler’s tone was sharp. 

“Yes, that’s young Lord Dawlish. Rolling in money, of 
course, but he became a communist when he was at Ox- 
ford.” 

Miss Van Schuyler, her face a battleground of con- 
tradictory emotions, said, “How long have you known this, 
Monsieur Poirot? ” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

“There was a picture in one of these papers— I noticed 
the resemblance. Then I found a signet ring with a coat of 
arms on it. Oh, there’s no doubt about it, I assure you.” 

He quite enjoyed reading the conflicting expressions that 
succeeded each other on Miss Van Schuyler’s face. Finally, 
with a gracious inclination of the head, she said, “I am 
very much obliged to you, Monsieur Poirot.” 

Poirot looked after her and smiled as she went out of the 
saloon. Then he sat down and his face grew grave once 
more. He was following out a train of thought in his 
mind. From time to time he nodded his head. 

“ Mais oui ,” he said at last. “It all fits in.” 


CHAPTER XXV 


Race found him still sitting there. 

“Well, Poirot, what about it? Pennington’s due in ten 
minutes. I’m leaving this in your hands.” 

Poirot rose quickly to his feet. “First, get hold of young 
Fanthorp.” 

“Fanthorp?” Race looked surprised. 

“Yes. Bring him to my cabin.” 

Race nodded and went off. Poirot went along to his 
cabin. Race arrived with young Fanthorp a minute or two 
afterward. 

Poirot indicated chairs and offered cigarettes. 

“Now, Monsieur Fanthorp,” he said, “to our business! 
I perceive that you wear the same tie that my friend 
Hastings wears.” 

Jim Fanthorp looked down at his neckwear with some 
bewilderment. 

“It’s an O.E. tie,” he said. 

“Exactly. You must understand that, though I am a for- 
eigner, I know something of the English point of view. I 
know, for instance, that there are ‘things which are done’ 
and ‘things which are not done.’ ” 

Jim Fanthorp grinned. 

“We don’t say that sort of thing much nowadays, sir.” 

“Perhaps not, but the custom, it still remains. The Old 
School Tie is the Old School Tie, and there are certain 
things (I know this from experience) that the Old School 


Death on the Nile 


274 

Tie does not do! One of those things, Monsieur Fanthorp 
is to butt into a private conversation unasked when ont 
does not know the people who are conducting it.” 

Fanthorp stared. 

Poirot went on: “But the other day, Monsieur Fanthorp 
that is exactly what you did do. Certain persons were 
quietly transacting some private business in the observatior 
saloon. You strolled near them, obviously in order to over- 
hear what it was that was in progress, and presently you 
actually turned round and congratulated a lady— Madame 
Simon Doyle— on the soundness of her business methods.’’ 

Jim Fanthorp’s face got very red. Poirot swept on, not 
waiting for a comment. 

“Now that, Monsieur Fanthorp, was not at all the be- 
haviour of one who wears a tie similar to that worn by my 
friend Hastings! Hastings is all delicacy, would die of 
shame before he did such a thing! Therefore, taking that 
action of yours in conjunction with the fact that you are a 
very young man to be able to afford an expensive holiday, 
that you are a member of a country solicitor’s firm, and 
therefore probably not extravagantly well off, and that you 
show no signs of recent illness such as might necessitate a 
prolonged visit abroad, I ask myself— and am now asking 
you— what is the reason for your presence on this boat?” 

Jim Fanthorp jerked his head back. 

“I decline to give you any information whatever, Mon- 
sieur Poirot. I really think you must be mad.” 

“I am not mad. I am very, very sane. Where is your 
firm? In Northampton; that is not very far from Wode 
Hall. What conversation did you try to overhear? One con- 
cerning legal documents. What was the object of your 
remark— a remark which you uttered with obvious embar- 


Death on the Nile 275 

assment and malaise ? Your object was to prevent Madame 
Doyle from signing any document unread.” 

He paused. 

“On this boat we have had a murder, and following that 
murder two other murders in rapid succession. If I further 
jive you the information that the weapon which killed 
Madame Otterbourne was a revolver owned by Monsieur 
Andrew Pennington, then perhaps you will realize that it 
5 actually your duty to tell us all you can.” 

Jim Fanthorp was silent for some minutes. At last he 
;aid: “You have rather an odd way of going about things, 
Monsieur Poirot, but I appreciate the points you have 
nade. The trouble is that I have no exact information to 
ay before you.” 

“You mean that it is a case, merely, of suspicion.” 

I “Yes.” 

“And therefore you think it injudicious to speak? That 
nay be true, legally speaking. But this is not a court of law. 
Colonel Race and myself are endeavouring to track down 

murderer. Anything that can help us to do so may be 
Valuable.” 

Again Jim Fanthorp reflected. Then he said: “Very well. 
What is it you want to know?” 

“Why did you come on this trip?” 

“My uncle, Mr. Carmichael, Mrs. Doyle’s English so- 
licitor, sent me. He handled a good many of her affairs. In 
this way, he was often in correspondence with Mr. Andrew 
Pennington, who was Mrs. Doyle’s American trustee. Sev- 
sral small incidents (I cannot enumerate them all) made 
my uncle suspicious that all was not quite as it should 
be.” 

“In plain language,” said Race, “your uncle suspected 


Death on the Nile 


276 

that Pennington was a crook?” 

Jim Fanthorp nodded, a faint smile on his face. 

“You put it rather more bluntly than I should, but th< 
main idea is correct. Various excuses made by Penning 
ton, certain plausible explanations of the disposal of funds 
aroused my uncle’s distrust. 

“While these suspicions of his were still nebulous. Mis: 
Ridgeway married unexpectedly and went off on he) 
honeymoon to Egypt. Her marriage relieved my uncle’: 
mind, as he knew that on her return to England the estatf 
would have to be formally settled and handed over. 

“However, in a letter she wrote him from Cairo, sh< 
mentioned casually that she had unexpectedly run acros: 
Andrew Pennington. My uncle’s suspicions became acute 
He felt sure that Pennington, perhaps by now in a desper 
ate position, was going to try and obtain signatures fron 
her which would cover his own defalcations. Since mj 
uncle had no definite evidence to lay before her, he was ir 
a most difficult position. The only thing he could think o: 
was to send me out here, travelling by air, with instruc 
tions to discover what was in the wind. I was to keep mj 
eyes open and act summarily if necessary— a most unpleas 
ant mission, I can assure you. As a matter of fact, on th( 
occasion you mention I had to behave more or less as ; 
cad! It was awkward, but on the whole I was satisfied witl 
the result.” 

“You mean you put Madame Doyle on her guard?’ 
asked Race. 

“Not so much that, but I think I put the wind u{ 
Pennington. I felt convinced he wouldn’t try any mor< 
funny business for some time, and by then I hoped to hav< 
got intimate enough with Mr. and Mrs. Doyle to conve) 


Death on the Nile 


277 


ome kind of a warning. As a matter of fact I hoped to do 
a through Doyle. Mrs. Doyle was so attached to Mr. 
'ennington that it would have been a bit awkward to sug- 
est things to her about him. It would have been easier for 
I Jie to approach the husband.” 

Race nodded. 

. Poirot asked: “Will you give me a candid opinion on one 
oint, Monsieur Fanthorp? If you were engaged in putting 
swindle over, would you choose Madame Doyle or Mon- 
teur Doyle as a victim?” 

Fanthorp smiled faintly. 

“Mr. Doyle, every time. Linnet Doyle was very shrewd 
n business matters. Her husband, I should fancy, is one of 
hose trustful fellows who know nothing of business and 
re always 
ut it.” 

1 “I agree,” said Poirot. He looked at Race. “And there’s 
our motive.” 

; Jim Fanthorp said: “But this is all pure conjecture. It 
;n’t evidence.” 

Poirot replied, easily, “Ah, bah! we will get evidence!” 
; “How?” 

“Possibly from Mr. Pennington himself.” 

Fanthorp looked doubtful. 

“I wonder. I very much wonder.” 

Race glanced at his watch. “He’s about due now.” 

Jim Fanthorp was quick to take the hint. He left them. 
Two minutes later Andrew Pennington made his appear- 

I nce. His manner was all smiling urbanity. Only the taut 
ne of his jaw and the wariness of his eyes betrayed the 
act that a thoroughly experienced fighter was on his guard. 
“Well, gentlemen,” he said, “here I am.” 


ready to ‘sign on the dotted line’ as he himself 


Death on the Nile 


278 

He sat down and looked at them inquiringly. 

“We asked you to come here, Monsieur Pennington,’ 
began Poirot, “because it is fairly obvious that you have ; 
very special and immediate interest in the case.” 

Pennington raised his eyebrows slightly. 

“Is that so?” 

Poirot said gently: “Surely. You have known Linne 
Ridgeway, I understand, since she was quite a child.” 

“Oh! that—” His face altered, became less alert. “I bej 
pardon, I didn’t quite get you. Yes, as I told you thi 
morning, I’ve known Linnet since she was a cute littli 
thing in pinafores.” 

“You were on terms of close intimacy with her father?’ 

“That’s so. Melhuish Ridgeway and I were close— ven 
close.” 

“You were so intimately associated that on his death hi 
appointed you business guardian to his daughter am 
trustee to the vast fortune she inherited.” 

“Why, roughly, that is so.” The wariness was bad 
again. The note was more cautious. “I was not the onlj 
trustee, naturally; others were associated with me.” 

“Who have since died?” 

“Two of them are dead. The other, Mr. Sterndale Rock- 
ford, is alive.” 

“Your partner?” 

“Yes.” 

“Mademoiselle Ridgeway, I understand, was not yet oi 
age when she married?” 

“She would have been twenty-one next July.” 

“And in the normal course of events she would have 
come into control of her fortune then?” 

“Yes.” 


Death on the Nile 


279 


“But her marriage precipitated matters?” 

Pennington’s jaw hardened. He shot out his chin at 
jkem aggressively. 

“You’ll pardon me, gentlemen, but what exact business 
; all this of yours?” 

“If you dislike answering the question—” 

: “There’s no dislike about it. I don’t mind what you ask 
le. But I don’t see the relevance of all this.” 

“Oh, but surely. Monsieur Pennington”— Poirot leaned 
orward, his eyes green and catlike— “there is the question 
f motive. In considering that, financial considerations must 
Iways be taken into account.” 

Pennington said sullenly, “By Ridgeway’s will, Linnet 
ot control of her dough when she was twenty-one or 
/hen she married.” 

! “No conditions of any kind?” 

“No conditions.” 

“And it is a matter, I am credibly assured, of millions.” 

“Millions it is.” 

Poirot said softly, “Your responsibility, Mr. Pennington, 
I nd that of your partner, has been a very grave one.” 

Pennington replied curtly: “We’re used to responsibil- 
y. Doesn’t worry us any.” 

“I wonder.” 

Something in his tone flicked the other man on the raw. 
le asked angrily, “What the devil do you mean?” 

Poirot replied with an air of engaging frankness: “I 
/as wondering, Mr. Pennington, whether Linnet Ridge- 
|/ay’s sudden marriage caused any— consternation, in your 
; ! ffice?” 

“Consternation?” 

“That was the word I used.” 


Death on the Nile 


280 

“What the hell are you driving at?” 

“Something quite simple. Are Linnet Doyle’s affairs i 
the perfect order they should be?” 

Pennington rose to his feet. 

“That’s enough. I’m through.” He made for the door. 

“But you will answer my question first?” 

Pennington snapped, “They’re in perfect order.” 

“You were not so alarmed when the news of Linm 
Ridgeway’s marriage reached you that you rushed ove 
to Europe by the first boat and staged an apparently for 
tuitous meeting in Egypt.” 

Pennington came back toward them. He had himsel 
under control once more. 

“What you are saying is absolute balderdash! I didh 
even know that Linnet was married till I met her in Cairc 
I was utterly astonished. Her letter must have missed m 
by a day in New York. It was forwarded and I got i 
about a week later.” 

“You came over by the Carmcmic, I think you said.” 

“That’s right.” 

“And the letter reached New York after the Car mam 
sailed?” 

“How many times have I got to repeat it?” 

“It is strange,” said Poirot. 

“What’s strange?” 

“That on your luggage there are no labels of the Car 
manic. The only recent labels of transatlantic sailing an 
the Normandie. The Normandie , I remember, sailed tw< 
days after the Car manic” 

For a moment the other was at a loss. His eyes wavered 

Colonel Race weighed in with telling effect. 

“Come now, Mr. Pennington,” he said. “We’ve severa 


Death on the Nile 


281 


;asons for believing that you came over on the Normandie 
nd not by the Carmanic, as you said. In that case, you 
jceived Mrs. Doyle’s letter before you left New York, 
rs no good denying it, for it’s the easiest thing in the 
mrld to check up the steamship companies.” 

Andrew Pennington felt absent-mindedly for a chair 
ad sat down. His face was impassive— a poker face. Be- 
ind that mask his agile brain looked ahead to the next 
love. 

“I’ll have to hand it you, gentlemen. You’ve been too 
nart for me. But I had my reasons for acting as I did.” 

“No doubt.” Race’s tone was curt. 

“If I give them to you, it must be understood I do so 
1 confidence.” 

“I think you can trust us to behave fittingly. Naturally 
cannot give assurances blindly.” 

“Well—” Pennington sighed. “I’ll come clean. There 
^as some monkey business going on in England. It wor- 
ed me. I couldn’t do much about it by letter. The only 
ling was to come over and see for myself.” 

“What do you mean by monkey business?” 

“I’d good reason to believe that Linnet was being 
kindled.” 

“By whom?” 

“Her British lawyer. Now that’s not the kind of accu- 
ition you can fling around anyhow. I made up my mind 
p come over right away and see into matters myself.” 

“That does great credit to your vigilance, I am sure, 
ut why the little deception about not having received 
te letter?” 

“Well, I ask you—” Pennington spread out his hands. 
V^ou can’t butt in on a honeymoon couple without more 


282 


Death on the Nile 


or less coming down to brass tacks and giving your rea 
sons. I thought it best to make the meeting accidental 
Besides, I didn’t know anything about the husband. H 
might have been mixed up in the racket for all I knew.” I 

“In fact all your actions were actuated by pure disin 
terestedness,” said Colonel Race drily. 

“You’ve said it, Colonel.” 

There was a pause. Race glanced at Poirot. The littli 
man leant forward. 

“Monsieur Pennington, we do not believe a word 0 
your story.” 

“The hell you don’t! And what the hell do you be 
lieve?” 

“We believe that Linnet Ridgeway’s unexpected mar! 
riage put you in a financial quandary. That you cami 
over post haste to try and find some way out of the mes. 
you were in— that is to say, some way of gaining time 
That, with that end in view, you endeavoured to ob 
tain Madame Doyle’s signature to certain documents— anc 
failed. That on the journey up the Nile, when walking 
along the cliff top at Abu Simbel, you dislodged a bouldei 
which fell and only very narrowly missed its object—” 

“You’re crazy.” 

“We believe that the same kind of circumstances oc- 
curred on the return journey. That is to say, an oppor- 
tunity presented itself of putting Madame Doyle out oi 
the way at a moment when her death would be almost 
certainly ascribed to the action of another person. We not 
only believe, but know , that it was your revolver which 
killed a woman who was about to reveal to us the name 
of the person who she had reason to believe killed both 
Linnet Doyle and the maid Louise—” 

“Hell!” The forcible ejaculation broke forth and in- 


Death on the Nile 


283 

srrupted Poirot’s stream of eloquence. “What are you get- 
ing at? Are you crazy? What motive had I to kill Lin- 
et? I wouldn’t get her money; that goes to her husband. 
Vhy don’t you pick on him? He's the one to benefit— not 
ae.” 

Race said coldly: “Doyle never left the lounge on the 
ight of the tragedy till he was shot at and wounded in 
le leg. The impossibility of his walking a step after that 

attested to by a doctor and a nurse— both independent 
nd reliable witnesses. Simon Doyle could not have killed 
is wife. He could not have killed Louise Bourget. He 
lost definitely did not kill Mrs. Otterbourne! You know 
tat as well as we do.” 

“I know he didn’t kill her.” Pennington sounded a little 
[aimer. “All I say is, why pick on me when I don’t benefit 
y her death?” 

“But, my dear sir,” Poirot’s voice came soft as a purring 
at, “that is rather a matter of opinion. Madame Doyle 
r as a keen woman of business, fully conversant of her 
wn affairs and very quick to spot any irregularity. As 
oon as she took up the control of her property, which 
tie would have done on her return to England, her sus- 
picions were bound to be aroused. But now that she is 
ead and that her husband, as you have just pointed out, 
i herits, the whole thing is different. Simon Doyle knows 
Dthing whatever of his wife’s affairs except that she was 
irich woman. He is of a simple, trusting disposition. You 
rjill find it easy to place complicated statements before 
1m, to involve the real issue in a net of figures, and to de- 
fy settlement with pleas of legal formalities and the re- 
< nt depression. I think that it makes a very considerable 
ifference to you whether you deal with the husband or 
1 e wife.” 


Death on the Nile 


284 

Pennington shrugged his shoulders. 

“Your ideas are— fantastic.” 

“Time will show.” 

“What did you say?” 

“I said, ‘Time will show!’ This is a matter of thre< 
deaths— three murders. The law will demand the mos 
searching investigation into the condition of Madamt 
Doyle’s estate.” 

He saw the sudden sag in the other’s shoulders am 
knew that he had won. Jim Fanthorp’s suspicions wer< 
well founded. 

Poirot went on: “You’ve played— and lost. Useless to g( 
on bluffing.” 

“You don’t understand,” Pennington muttered. “It’s al 
square enough really. It’s been this damned slump— Wal 
Street’s been crazy. But I’d staged a comeback. With lucl , 
everything will be O.K. by the middle of June.” 

With shaking hands he took a cigarette, tried to ligh 
it, failed. 

“I suppose,” mused Poirot, “that the boulder was a sud 
den temptation. You thought nobody saw you.” 

“That was an accident. I swear it was an accident!” Thi 
man leant forward, his face working, his eyes terrified. “ 
stumbled and fell against it. I swear it was an accident. . . .’ 

The two men said nothing. 

Pennington suddenly pulled himself together. He wa 
still a wreck of a man, but his fighting spirit had returnee 
in a certain measure. He moved toward the door. 

“You can’t pin that on me, gentlemen. It was an acci 
dent. And it wasn’t I who shot her. D’you hear? You can’ 
pin that on me either— and you never will.” 

He went out. 


CHAPTER XXVI 


\.S THE DOOR CLOSED BEHIND HIM, RACE GAVE A DEEP SIGH. 

“We got more than I thought we should. Admission of 
raud. Admission of attempted murder. Further than that 
t’s impossible to go. A man will confess, more or less, to 
ttempted murder, but you won’t get him to confess to 
he real thing.” 

“Sometimes it can be done,” said Poirot. His eyes wen 
Ireamy— catlike. 

Race looked at him curiously. 

“Got a plan?” 

Poirot nodded. Then he said ticking off the items on 
lis fingers: “The garden at Assuan. Mr. Allerton’s state - 
nent. The two bottles of nail polish. My bottle of wine. 
The velvet stole. The stained handkerchief. The pistol that 
vas left on the scene of the crime. The death of Louise. 
The death of Madame Otterbourne . . . Yes, it’s all there. 
Ynnington didn’t do it, Race!” 

“What?” Race was startled. 

“Pennington didn’t do it. He had the motive, yes. He 
lad the will to do it, yes. He got as far as attempting to 
lo it. Mais c'est tout. For this crime, something was wanted 
hat Pennington hasn’t got! This is a crime that needed 
udacity, swift and faultless execution, courage, indiffer- 
nce to danger, and a resourceful, calculating brain. Pen- 
tington hasn’t got those attributes. He couldn’t do a crime 
tnless he knew it to be safe. This crime wasn’t safe! It 

285 


286 


Death on the Nile 


hung on a razor edge. It needed boldness. Penningtoi 
isn’t bold. He’s only astute.” 

Race looked at him with the respect one able man give 
to another. 

“You’ve got it all well taped,” he said. 

“I think so, yes. There are one or two things— that tele 
gram, for instance, that Linnet Doyle read. I should lik 
to get that cleared up.” 

“By Jove, we forgot to ask Doyle. He was telling u 
when poor old Ma Otterbourne came along. We’ll as! 
him again.” 

“Presently. First, I have someone else to whom I wis! 
to speak.” 

“Who’s that?” 

“Tim Allerton.” 

Race raised his eyebrows. 

“Allerton? Well, we’ll get him here.” 

He pressed a bell and sent the steward with a message 

Tim Allerton entered with a questioning look. 

“Steward said you wanted to see me?” 

“That is right, Monsieur Allerton. Sit down.” 

Tim sat. His face was attentive but very slightly borec 

“Anything I can do?” His tone was polite but not en 
thusiastic. 

Poirot said: “In a sense, perhaps. What I really requir 
is for you to listen.” 

Tim’s eyebrows rose in polite surprise. 

“Certainly. I’m the world’s best listener. Can be relic 
on to say ‘Oo-er!’ at the right moments.” 

“That is very satisfactory. ‘Oo-er!’ will be very ex 
pressive. Eh bien, let us commence. When I met you an 
vour mother at Assuan, Monsieur Allerton, I was attracte 

e/ 


Death on the Nile 


287 

0 your company very strongly. To begin with, I thought 
[/■our mother was one of the most charming people I had 
:ver met—” 

The weary face flickered for a moment; a shade of ex- 
pression came into it. 

; “She is— unique,” he said. 

“But the second thing that interested me was your men- 
ion of a certain lady.” 

. “Really?” 

“Yes, a Mademoiselle Joanna Southwood. You see, I 
tad recently been hearing that name.” 

He paused and went on: “For the last three years there 
lave been certain jewel robberies that have been worry- 
ng Scotland Yard a good deal. They are what may be de- 
icribed as Society robberies. The method is usually the 
;ame— the substitution of an imitation piece of jewellery 
or an original. My friend, Chief Inspector Japp, came to 
he conclusion that the robberies were not the work of one 
jerson, but of two people working in with each other very 
deverly. He was convinced, from the considerable inside 
tnowledge displayed, that the robberies were the work of 
people in a good social position. And finally his attention 
lecame riveted on Mademoiselle Joanna Southwood. 

“Every one of the victims had been either a friend or ac- 
quaintance of hers, and in each case she had either handled 
ir been lent the piece of jewellery in question. Also, her 
,tyle of living was far in excess of her income. On the 
ither hand it was quite clear that the actual robbery— that 
s to say the substitution— had not been accomplished by 
ter. In some cases she had even been out of England dur- 
ing the period when the jewellery must have been replaced. 

“So gradually a little picture grew up in Chief Inspec- 


288 


Death on the Nile 


tor Japp’s mind. Mademoiselle Southwood was at one time ; 
associated with a Guild of Modern Jewellery. He sus- 
pected that she handled the jewels in question, made ac- ; 
curate drawings of them, got them copied by some humble 
but dishonest working jeweller and that the third part of 
the operation was the successful substitution by another 
person— somebody who could have been proved never to 
have handled the jewels and never to have had anything 
to do with copies or imitations of precious stones. Of the \ 
identity of this other person Japp was ignorant. 

“Certain things that fell from you in conversation in- 
terested me. A ring that had disappeared when you were 
in Majorca, the fact that you had been in a house-party 
where one of these fake substitutions had occurred, your 
close association with Mademoiselle Southwood. There ' 
was also the fact that you obviously resented my presence 
and tried to get your mother to be less friendly toward 
me. That might, of course, have been just personal dis- 
like, but I thought not. You were too anxious to try and 
hide your distaste under a genial manner. 

“Eh bien, after the murder of Linnet Doyle, it is dis- 
covered that her pearls are missing. You comprehend, at 
once I think of you! But I am not quite satisfied. For if 
you are working, as I suspect, with Mademoiselle South- 
wood (who was an intimate friend of Madame Doyle’s) 
then substitution would be the method employed— not 
barefaced theft. But then, the pearls quite unexpectedly are 
returned, and what do I discover? That they are not genu- 
ine, but imitation. 

“I know then who the real thief is. It was the imitation 
string which was stolen and returned— an imitation which 
you had previously substituted for the real necklace.” 


Death on the Nile 


289 

He looked at the young man in front of him. Tim was 
white under his tan. He was not so good a fighter as Pen- 
nington; his stamina was bad. He said, with an effort to 
sustain his mocking manner: “Indeed? And if so, what did 
I do with them?” 

“That I know also.” 

The young man’s face changed— broke up. 

Poirot went on slowly: “There is only one place where 
they can be. I have reflected, and my reason tells me that 
that is so. Those pearls, Monsieur Allerton, are concealed 
in a rosary that hangs in your cabin. The beads of it are 
very elaborately carved. I think you had it made specially. 
Those beads unscrew, though you would never think so 
to look at them. Inside each is a pearl, stuck with secco- 
tine. Most police searchers respect religious symbols, un- 
less there is something obviously queer about them. You 
counted on that. I endeavoured to find out how Mademoi- 
selle Southwood sent the imitation necklace out to you. 
She must have done so, since you came here from Majorca 
on hearing that Madame Doyle would be here for her 
honeymoon. My theory is that it was sent in a book— a 
square hole being cut out of the pages in the middle. A 
book goes with the ends open and is practically never 
opened in the post.” 

There was a pause— a long pause. Then Tim said quietly: 
“You win! It’s been a good game, but it’s over at last. 
There’s nothing for it now, I suppose, but to take my 
medicine.” 

Poirot nodded gently. 

“Do you realize that you were seen that night?” 

“Seen?” Tim started. 

“Yes, on the night that Linnet Doyle died, someone saw 


290 


Death on the Nile 


you leave her cabin just after one in the morning.” 

Tim said: “Look here— you aren’t thinking ... It 
wasn’t I who killed her! I’ll swear that! I’ve been in the 
most awful stew. To have chosen that night of all others 
. . . God, it’s been awful!” 

Poirot said: “Yes, you must have had uneasy moments. 
But, now that the truth has come out, you may be able 
to help us. Was Madame Doyle alive or dead when you 
stole the pearls?” 

“I don’t know,” Tim said hoarsely. “Honest to God, 
Monsieur Poirot, I don’t know! I’d found out where she 
put them at night— on the little table by the bed. I crept 
in, felt very softly on the table and grabbed ’em, put down 
the others and crept out again. I assumed, of course, that 
she was asleep.” 

“Did you hear her breathing? Surely you would have 
listened for that?” 

Tim thought earnestly. 

“It was very still— very still indeed. No, I can’t remem- 
ber actually hearing her breathe.” 

“Was there any smell of smoke lingering in the air, as 
there would have been if a firearm had been discharged 
recently?” 

“I don’t think so. I don’t remember it.” 

Poirot sighed. 

“Then we are no further.” 

Tim asked curiously, “Who was it saw me?” 

“Rosalie Otterbourne. She came round from the other 
side of the boat and saw you leave Linnet Doyle’s cabin 
and go to your own.” 

“So it was she who told you.” 

Poirot said gently, “Excuse me; she did not tell me.” 


Death on the Nile 


291 


“But then, how do you know?” 

“Because I am Hercule Poirot! I do not need to be told. 
When I taxed her with it, do you know what she said? 
She said, ‘I saw nobody.’ And she lied.” 

“But why?” 

Poirot said in a detached voice: “Perhaps because she 
thought the man she saw was the murderer. It looked like 
that, you know.” 

“That seems to me all the more reason for telling you.” 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. “She did not think so, it 
seems.” 

Tim said, a queer note in his voice: “She’s an extraordi- 
nary sort of a girl. She must have been through a pretty 
rough time with that mother of hers.” 

“Yes, life has not been easy for her.” 

“Poor kid,” Tim muttered. Then he looked toward 
Race. 

“Well, sir, where do we go from here? I admit taking 
the pearls from Linnet’s cabin and you’ll find them just 
where you say they are. I’m guilty all right. But as far as 
Miss Southwood is concerned, I’m not admitting anything. 
You’ve no evidence whatever against her. How I got hold 
of the fake necklace is my own business.” 

Poirot murmured, “A very correct attitude.” 

Tim said with a flash of humour, “Always the gentle- 
man!” He added: “Perhaps you can imagine how annoy- 
ing it was to me to find my mother cottoning on to you! 
I’m not a sufficiently hardened criminal to enjoy sitting 
cheek by jowl with a successful detective just before bring- 
ing off a rather risky coup! Some people might get a kick 
out of it. I didn’t. Frankly, it gave me cold feet.” 

“But it did not deter you from making your attempt?” 


2 9 2 


Death on the Nile 


Tim shrugged his shoulders. 

“I couldn’t funk it to that extent. The exchange had t< 
be made sometime and I’d got a unique opportunity oi 3 
this boat— a cabin only two doors off, and Linnet herseli 1 
so preoccupied with her own troubles that she wasn’ 
likely to detect the change.” 1 

“I wonder if that was so—” 

Tim looked up sharply. “What do you mean?” 

Poirot pressed the bell. “I am going to ask Miss Otter- 
bourne if she will come here for a minute.” 

Tim frowned but said nothing. A steward came, re- 
ceived the order and went away with the message. 

Rosalie came after a few minutes. Her eyes, reddened 
with recent weeping, widened a little at seeing Tim, but 
her old attitude of suspicion and defiance seemed entirely 
absent. She sat down and with a new docility looked from 
Race to Poirot. 

“We’re very sorry to bother you, Miss Otterbourne,” 
said Race gently. He was slightly annoyed with Poirot. 

“It doesn’t matter,” the girl said in a low voice. 

Poirot said: “It is necessary to clear up one or two points. 
When I asked you whether you saw anyone on the star- 
board deck at one-ten this morning, your answer was that 
you saw nobody. Fortunately I have been able to arrive 
at the truth without your help. Monsieur Allerton has ad- 
mitted that he was in Linnet Doyle’s cabin last night.” 

She flashed a swift glance at Tim. Tim, his face grim 
and set, gave a curt nod. 

“The time is correct, Monsieur Allerton?” 

Allerton replied, “Quite correct.” 

Rosalie was staring at him. Her lips trembled— fell 
apart. . . . 


Death on the Nile 


293 


“But you didn’t— you didn’t—” 

He said quickly: “No, I didn’t kill her. I’m a thief, not 
1 murderer. It’s all going to come out, so you might as 
well know. I was after her pearls.” 

Poirot said, “Mr. Allerton’s story is that he went to her 
cabin last night and exchanged a string of fake pearls for 
the real ones.” 

“Did you?” asked Rosalie. Her eyes, grave, sad, child- 
like, questioned his. 

“Yes,” said Tim. 

There was a pause. Colonel Race shifted restlessly. 

Poirot said in a curious voice: “That, as I say, is Mon- 
sieur Allerton’s story, partially confirmed by your evi- 
dence. That is to say, there is evidence that he did visit 
Linnet Doyle’s cabin last night, but there is no evidence 

( to show why he did so.” 

Tim stared at him. “But you know!” 

“What do I know?” 

“Well— you know I’ve got the pearls.” 

' l Mais oui—mais oui! I know you have the pearls, but I 
do not know when you got them. It may have been before 
last night. ... You said just now that Linnet Doyle 
would not have noticed the substitution. I am not so sure 
of that. Supposing she did notice it. . . . Supposing, even, 
she knew who did it. . . . Supposing that last night she 
threatened to expose the whole business, and that you 
knew she meant to do so . . . and supposing that you 
overheard the scene in the saloon between Jacqueline de 
Bellefort and Simon Doyle and, as soon as the saloon was 
empty, you slipped in and secured the pistol, and then, 
an hour later, when the boat had quieted down, you crept 
along to Linnet Doyle’s cabin and made quite sure that 


294 


Death on the Nile 


no exposure would come. . . 

“My God!” said Tim. Out of his ashen face, two tor- 
tured, agonized eyes gazed dumbly at Hercule Poirot. 

The latter went on: “But somebody else saw you— the 
girl Louise. The next day she came to you and black- 
mailed you. You must pay her handsomely or she would 
tell what she knew. You realized that to submit to black- 
mail would be the beginning of the end. You pretended to 
agree, made an appointment to come to her cabin just be- 
fore lunch with the money. Then, when she was count- 
ing the notes, you stabbed her. 

“But again luck was against you. Somebody saw you go 
to her cabin”— he half turned to Rosalie— “your mother. 
Once again you had to act— dangerously, foolhardily— but 
it was the only chance. You had heard Pennington talk 
about his revolver. You rushed into his cabin, got hold of 
it, listened outside Dr. Bessner’s cabin door and shot 
Madame Otterbourne before she could reveal your name.” 

“N-o!” cried Rosalie. “He didn’t! He didn’t !” 

“After that, you did the only thing you could do- 
rushed round the stern. And when I rushed after you, you 
had turned and pretended to be coming in the opposite 
direction. You had handled the revolver in gloves; those 
gloves were in your pocket when I asked for them. . . .” 

Tim said, “Before God, I swear it isn’t true— not a word 
of it.” But his voice, ill assured and trembling, failed to 
convince. 

It was then that Rosalie Otterbourne surprised them. 

“Of course it isn’t true! And Monsieur Poirot knows it 
isn’t! He’s saying it for some reason of his own.” 

Poirot looked at her. A faint smile came to his lips. He 
spread out his hands in token of surrender. 


Death on the Nile 


295 


“Mademoiselle is too clever. . . . But you agree— it was 
1 good case?” 

“What the devil—” Tim began with rising anger, but 
?oirot held up a hand. 

“There is a very good case against you, Monsieur Aller- 
fcon. I wanted you to realize that. Now I will tell you 
something more pleasant. I have not yet examined that 
rosary in your cabin. It may be that, when I do, I shall 
End nothing there. And then, since Mademoiselle Otter- 
bourne sticks to it that she saw no one on the deck last 
night, eh bien, there is no case against you at all. The 
pearls were taken by a kleptomaniac who has since re- 
turned them. They are in a little box on the table by the 
door, if you would care to examine them with Mademoi- 
selle.” 

Tim got up. He stood for a moment unable to speak. 
When he did, his words seemed inadequate, but it is pos- 
sible that they satisfied his listeners. 

“Thanks!” he said. “You won’t have to give me another 
chance.” 

He held the door open for the girl; she passed out and, 
picking up the little cardboard box, he followed her. 

Side by side they went. Tim opened the box, took out 
the sham string of pearls and hurled it far from him into 
the Nile. 

“There!” he said. “That’s gone. When I return the box 
to Poirot the real string will be in it. What a damned fool 
I’ve been!” 

Rosalie said in a low voice, “Why did you come to do 
it in the first place?” 

“How did I come to start, do you mean? Oh, I don’t 
know. Boredom— laziness— the fun of the thing. Such a 


Death on the Nile 


296 


much more attractive way of earning a living than ju; 
pegging away at a job. Sounds pretty sordid to you, I es 
pect, but you know there was an attraction about it- 
mainly the risk, I suppose.” 

“I think I understand.” 

“Yes, but you wouldn’t ever do it.” 

Rosalie considered for a moment or two, her grav 
young head bent. 

“No,” she said simply. “I wouldn’t.” 

He said: “Oh, my dear— you’re so lovely ... so utterl) 
lovely. Why wouldn’t you say you’d seen me last night?’ 

“I thought— they might suspect you,” Rosalie said. 

“Did you suspect me?” 

“No. I couldn’t believe that you’d kill anyone.” 

“No. I’m not the strong stuff murderers are made of 
I’m only a miserable sneakthief.” 

She put out a timid hand and touched his arm. 

“Don’t say that. . . .” 

He caught her hand in his. 

“Rosalie, would you— you know what I mean? Or would 
you always despise me and throw it in my teeth?” 

She smiled faintly. “There are things you could throw 
in my teeth, too. . . .” 

“Rosalie— darling . . .” 

But she held back a minute longer. 

“This-Joanna?” 

Tim gave a sudden shout. 

“Joanna? You’re as bad as Mother. I don’t care a damn 
about Joanna. She’s got a face like a horse and a predatory 
eye. A most unattractive female.” 

Presently Rosalie said, “Your mother need never know 
about you.” 1 


t 


Death on the Nile 


297 


“I’m not sure,” Tim said thoughtfully. “I think I shall 
ell her. Mother’s got plenty of stuffing, you know. She can 
;tand up to things. Yes, I think I shall shatter her maternal 



•elations with Joanna were purely of a business nature that 
ihe’ll forgive me everything else.” 

They had come to Mrs. Allerton’s cabin and Tim 
mocked firmly on the door. It opened and Mrs. Allerton 
;tood on the threshold. 

“Rosalie and I—” began Tim. He paused. 

“Oh, my dears,” said Mrs. Allerton. She folded Rosalie 
in her arms. “My dear, dear child ... I always hoped— 
but Tim was so tiresome— and pretended he didn’t like you. 
But of course I saw through that!” 

Rosalie said in a broken voice: “You’ve been so sweet 
to me— always. I used to wish— to wish—” 

She broke off and sobbed happily on Mrs. Allerton’s 
shoulder. 


CHAPTER XXVII 


As THE DOOR CLOSED BEHIND TlM AND ROSALIE, PoiROI 
looked somewhat apologetically at Colonel Race. Th< 
Colonel was looking rather grim. 

“You will consent to my little arrangement, yes?” Poiroi 
pleaded. “It is irregular— I know it is irregular, yes— but 1 
have a high regard for human happiness.” 

“You’ve none for mine,” said Race. 

“That jeune fille, I have a tenderness toward her, and 
she loves that young man. It will be an excellent match: 
she has the stiffening he needs; the mother likes her; every- 
thing is thoroughly suitable.” 

“In fact the marriage has been arranged by heaven ana 
Hercule Poirot. All I have to do is to compound a felony.” 

“But, mon ami , I told you, it was all conjecture on my 
part.” 

Race grinned suddenly. 

“It’s all right by me,” he said. “I’m not a damned po- 
liceman, thank God! I daresay the young fool will go 
straight enough now. The girl’s straight all right. No, what 
I’m complaining of is your treatment of me! I’m a patient 
man, but there are limits to my patience! Do you know 
who committed the three murders on this boat or don’t 
you?” 

“I do.” 

“Then why all this beating about the bush?” 

“You think that I am just amusing myself with side is- 

298 


Death on the Nile 299 

ues? And it annoys you? But it is not that. Once I went 
>rofessionally to an archaeological expedition— and I learnt 
omething there. In the course of an excavation, when 
omething comes up out of the ground, everything is 
,-leared away very carefully all around it. You take away 
he loose earth, and you scrape here and there with a 
mife until finally your object is there, all alone, ready to 
)e drawn and photographed with no extraneous matter 
confusing it. That is what I have been seeking to do- 
dear away the extraneous matter so that we can see the 
ruth— the naked shining truth.” 

“Good,” said Race. “Let’s have this naked shining truth, 
it wasn’t Pennington. It wasn’t young Allerton. I presume 
t wasn’t Fleetwood. Let’s hear who it was for a change.” 

“My friend, I am just about to tell you.” 

There was a knock on the door. Race uttered a muffled 
eurse. 

1 It was Dr. Bessner and Cornelia. The latter was looking 
upset. 

“Oh, Colonel Race,” she exclaimed, “Miss Bowers has 
just told me about Cousin Marie. It’s been the most dread- 
ful shock. She said she couldn’t bear the responsibility all 
by herself any longer, and that I’d better know, as I was 
one of the family. I just couldn’t believe it at first, but Dr. 
Bessner here has been just wonderful.” 

“No, no,” protested the doctor modestly. 

“He’s been so kind, explaining it all, and how people 
really can’t help it. He’s had kleptomaniacs in his clinic. 
And he’s explained to me how it’s very often due to a 
deep-seated neurosis.” 

Cornelia repeated the words with awe. 

“It’s planted very deeply in the subconscious; sometimes 


300 


Death on the Nile 


it’s just some little thing that happened when you were a 
child. And he’s cured people by getting them to think , 
back and remember what that little thing was.” 

Cornelia paused, drew a deep breath, and started ofl 
again. 

“But it’s worrying me dreadfully in case it all gets out. 
It would be too, too terrible in New York. Why, all the 
tabloids would have it. Cousin Marie and Mother and 
everybody— they’d never hold up their heads again.” 

Race sighed. “That’s all right,” he said. “This is Hush 
Hush House.” 

“I beg your pardon, Colonel Race?” 

“What I was endeavouring to say was that anything 
short of murder is being hushed up.” 

“Oh!” Cornelia clasped her hands. “I’m so relieved. I’ve 
just been worrying and worrying.” 

“You have the heart too tender,” said Dr. Bessner, and 
patted her benevolently on the shoulder. He said to the 
others, “She has a very sensitive and beautiful nature.” 

“Oh, I haven’t really. You’re too kind.” 

Poirot murmured, “Have you seen any more of Mr. Fer- 
guson?” 

Cornelia blushed. 

“No— but Cousin Marie’s been talking about him.” 

“It seems the young man is highly born,” said Dr. Bess- 
ner. “I must confess he does not look it. His clothes are 
terrible. Not for a moment does he appear a well-bred 
man.” 

“And what do you think, Mademoiselle?” 

“I think he must be just plain crazy,” said Cornelia. 

Poirot turned to the doctor. “How is your patient?” 

“Ach, he is going on splendidly. I have just reassured 


Death on the Nile 


301 


he little Fraulein de Bellefort. Would you believe it, I 
: ound her in despair. Just because the fellow had a bit of 
1 temperature this afternoon! But what could be more 
aatural? It is amazing that he is not in a high fever now. 
3ut no, he is like some of our peasants; he has a magnificent 
• constitution, the constitution of an ox. I have seen them 
with deep wounds that they hardly notice. It is the same 
with Mr. Doyle. His pulse is steady, his temperature only 
slightly above normal. I was able to pooh pooh the little 
lady’s fears. All the same, it is ridiculous, nicht njoahr? One 
minute you shoot a man; the next you are in hysterics in 
: case he may not be doing well.” 

Cornelia said, “She loves him terribly, you see.” 

“Ach! but it is not sensible, that. If you loved a man, 
would you try and shoot him? No, you are sensible.” 

“I don’t like things that go off with bangs anyway,” said 
Cornelia. 

“Naturally you do not. You are very feminine.” 

Race interrupted this scene of heavy approval. “Since 
Doyle is all right, there’s no reason I shouldn’t come along 
and resume our talk of this afternoon. He was just telling 
me about a telegram.” 

Dr. Bessner’s bulk moved up and down appreciatively. 

“Ho, ho, ho, it was very funny that! Doyle, he tells me 
labout it. It was a telegram all about vegetables— potatoes, 
artichokes, leeks— Ach! pardon?” 

With a stifled exclamation, Race had sat up in his chair. 

“My God,” he said. “So that’s it! Richetti!” 

He looked round on three uncomprehending faces. 

“A new code— it was used in the South African rebel- 
lion. Potatoes mean machine guns, artichokes are high ex- 
plosives— and so on. Richetti is no more an archaeologist 


302 


Death on the Nile 


than I am! He’s a very dangerous agitator, a man who’ 
killed more than once, and I’ll swear that he’s killed onci 
again. Mrs. Doyle opened that telegram by mistake, yoi 
see. If she were ever to repeat what was in it before me 
he knew his goose would be cooked!” 

He turned to Poirot. “Am I right?” he asked. “I 
Richetti the man?” 

“He is your man,” said Poirot. “I always thought then 
was something wrong about him! He was almost too wore 
perfect in his role; he was all archaeologist, not enougt 
human being.” 

He paused and then said: “But it was not Richetti whe 
killed Linnet Doyle. For some time now I have knowr 
what I may express as the ‘first half’ of the murderer. Now 
I know the ‘second half’ also. The picture is complete, 
But you understand that, although I know what must have 
happened, I have no proof that it happened. Intellectu- 
ally the case is satisfying. Actually it is profoundly unsat- 
isfactory. There is only one hope— a confession from the 
murderer.” 

Dr. Bessner raised his shoulders sceptically. “Ach! but 
that— it would be a miracle.” 

“I think not. Not under the circumstances.” 

Cornelia cried out: “But who is it? Aren’t you going to 
tell us?” 

Poirot’s eyes ranged quietly over the three of them. 
Race, smiling sardonically, Bessner, still looking sceptical, ! 
Cornelia, her mouth hanging a little open gazing at him 
with eager eyes. 

“ Mais oui he said. “I like an audience, I must confess. 
I am vain, you see. I am puffed up with conceit. I like to 
say, ‘See how clever is Hercule Poirot!’ ” 


Death on the Nile 303 

Race shifted a little in his chair. 

“Well,” he asked gently, “just how clever is Hercule 
Poirot?” 

Shaking his head sadly from side to side Poirot said: 
‘To begin with I was stupid— incredibly stupid. To me 
:he stumbling block was the pistol— Jacqueline de Belle- 
: ort’s pistol. Why had that pistol not been left on the 
;cene of the crime? The idea of the murderer was quite 
olainly to incriminate her. Why then did the murderer 
:ake it away? I was so stupid that I thought of all sorts 
:>f fantastic reasons. The real one was very simple. The 
murderer took it away because he had to take it away— 
because he had no choice in the matter.” 



CHAPTER XXVIII 


“YOU AND I, MY FRIEND,” PoiROT LEANED TOWARD RACE, 
“started our investigation with a preconceived idea. That 
idea was that the crime was committed on the spur of 
the moment, without any preliminary planning. Somebody 
wished to remove Linnet Doyle and had seized their op-; 
portunity to do so at a moment when the crime would 
almost certainly be attributed to Jacqueline de Bellefort. 
It therefore followed that the person in question had over- 
heard the scene between Jacqueline and Simon Doyle and 
had obtained possession of the pistol after the others had 
left the saloon. 

“But, my friends, if that preconceived idea was wrong, 
the whole aspect of the case altered. And it was wrong! 
This was no spontaneous crime committed on the spur of 
the moment. It was, on the contrary, very carefully 
planned and accurately timed, with all the details meticu- 
lously worked out beforehand, even to the drugging of 
Hercule Poirot’s bottle of wine on the night in question! 

“But, yes, that is so! I was put to sleep so that there 
should be no possibility of my participating in the events 
of the night. It did just occur to me as a possibility. I drink 
wine; my two companions at table drink whisky and min- 1 
eral water respectively. Nothing easier than to slip a dose 
of harmless narcotic into my bottle of wine— the bottles 
stand on the tables all day. But I dismissed the thought. 
It had been a hot day; I had been unusually tired; it was 


Death on the Nile 


305 


not really extraordinary that I should for once have slept 
heavily instead of lightly as I usually do. 

“You see, I was still in the grip of the preconceived 
idea. If I had been drugged, that would have implied pre- 
meditation, it would mean that before seven-thirty, when 
dinner is served, the crime had already been decided upon; 
and that (always from the point of view of the precon- 
ceived idea) was absurd. 

- ! “The first blow to the preconceived idea was when the 
pistol was recovered from the Nile. To begin with, if we 
were right in our assumptions, the pistol ought never to 
have been thrown overboard at all. . . . And there was 
; more to follow.” 

Poirot turned to Dr. Bessner. 

“You, Dr. Bessner, examined Linnet Doyle’s body. You 
will remember that the wound showed signs of scorch- 
ing— that is to say, that the pistol had been placed close 
against the head before being fired.” 

Bessner nodded. “So. That is exact.” 

“But when the pistol was found it was wrapped in a 
velvet stole, and that velvet showed definite signs that a 
pistol had been fired through its folds, presumably under 
the impression that that would deaden the sound of the 
shot. But if the pistol had been fired through the velvet, 
there would have been no signs of burning on the vic- 
tim’s skin. Therefore, the shot fired through the stole could 
not have been the shot that killed Linnet Doyle. Could it 
have been the other shot— the one fired by Jacqueline de 
Bellefort at Simon Doyle? Again no, for there had been 
two witnesses of that shooting, and we knew all about it. 
It appeared, therefore, as though a third shot had been 
fired— one we knew nothing about. But only two shots had 


Death on the Nile 


30 6 

been fired from the pistol, and there was no hint or sug- 
gestion of another shot. 

“Here we were face to face with a very curious un- 
explained circumstance. The next interesting point was 
the fact that in Linnet Doyle’s cabin I found two bottles 
of coloured nail polish. Now ladies very often vary the 
colour of their nails, but so far Linnet Doyle’s nails had 
always been the shade called Cardinal— a deep dark red, 
The other bottle was labelled Rose, which is a shade of 
pale pink, but the few drops remaining in the bottle were 
not pale pink but a bright red. I was sufficiently curious 
to take out the stopper and sniff. Instead of the usual strong 
odour of pear drops, the bottle smelt of vinegar! That is 
to say, it suggested that the drop or two of fluid in it was 
red ink. Now there is no reason why Madame Doyle should 
not have had a bottle of red ink, but it would have been! 
more natural if she had had red ink in a red ink bottle 
and not in a nail polish bottle. It suggested a link with the 
faintly stained handkerchief which had been wrapped 
round the pistol. Red ink washes out quickly but always 
leaves a pale pink stain. 

“I should perhaps have arrived at the truth with these 
slender indications, but an event occurred which rendered 
all doubt superfluous. Louise Bourget was killed in cir- 
cumstances which pointed unmistakably to the fact that 
she had been blackmailing the murderer. Not only was a 
fragment of a mille franc note still clasped in her hand, 
but I remembered some very significant words she had 
used this morning. 

“Listen carefully, for here is the crux of the whole mat- 
ter. When I asked her if she had seen anything the pre- 
vious night she gave this very curious answer: ‘Naturally ,| 


Death on the Nile 


3°7 

j c I had been unable to sleep, if I had mounted the stairs, 
hen perhaps I might have seen this assassin, this monster 
nter or leave Madame’s cabin. . . .’ Now what exactly 
id that tell us?” 

Bessner, his nose wrinkling with intellectual interest, re- 
died promptly, “It told you that she had mounted the 
tair.” 

“No, no; you fail to see the point. Why should she 
iave said that, to us?” 

“To convey a hint.” 

“But why hint to us? If she knows who the murderer 
L there are two courses open to her— to tell us the truth, 
>r to hold her tongue and demand money for her silence 
rom the person concerned! But she does neither. She 
leither says promptly: ‘I saw nobody. I was asleep.’ Nor 
loes she say, ‘Yes, I saw someone, and it was so and so.’ 
*Vhy use that significant indeterminate rigmarole of 
vords? Tar bleu, there can be only one reason! She is hint- 
ng to the murderer; therefore the murderer must have 
oeen present at the time. But, besides myself and Colonel 
lace, only two people were present— Simon Doyle and 
Dr. Bessner.” 

The doctor sprang up with a roar. 

“Ach! what is that you say? You accuse me? Again? 
3ut it is ridiculous— beneath contempt.” 

Poirot said sharply: “Be quiet. I am telling you what I 
hought at the time. Let us remain impersonal.” 

“He doesn’t mean he thinks it’s you now,” said Cor- 
lelia soothingly. 

Poirot went on quickly: “So it lay there— between Simon 
Doyle and Dr. Bessner. But what reason has Bessner to 
till Linnet Doyle? None, so far as I know. Simon Doyle, 


Death on the Nile 


308 

then? But that was impossible! There were plenty of wii ti 
nesses who could swear that Doyle never left the salooji 
that evening until the quarrel broke out. After that he w:I i> 
wounded and it would then have been physically impo; 
sible for him to have done so. Had I good evidence 0 
both those points? Yes, I had the evidence of Mademoiselli 
Robson, of Jim Fanthorp and of Jacqueline de Bellefoj 
as to the first, and I had the skilled testimony of Dr. Bess 
ner and of Mademoiselle Bowers as to the other. No dout 
was possible. 

“So Dr. Bessner must be the guilty one. In favour 0 
this theory there was the fact that the maid had bee: 
stabbed with a surgical knife. On the other hand Bessne 
had deliberately called attention to this fact. 

“And then, my friends, a second perfectly indisputabl 
fact became apparent to me. Louise Bourget’s hint coult 
not have been intended for Dr. Bessner, because she coulr 
perfectly well have spoken to him in private at any tim 
she liked. There was one person, and one person only, wh< 
corresponded to her necessity— Simon Doyle! Simon DoyL 
was wounded, was constantly attended by a doctor, wa 
in that doctor’s cabin. It was to him therefore that sh< 
risked saying those ambiguous words, in case she migh 
not get another chance. And I remembered how she hat 
gone on, turning to him: ‘Monsieur, I implore you— ym 
see how it is? What can I say?’ And his answer, ‘My goot 
girl, don’t be a fool. Nobody thinks you saw or heart 
anything. You’ll be quite all right. I’ll look after you. No- 
body’s accusing you of anything.’ That was the assurance 
she wanted, and she got it!” 

Bessner uttered a colossal snort. 

“Ach! it is foolish, that! Do you think a man with £ 


Death on the Nile 


309 


ractured bone and a splint on his leg could go walking 
[3pout the boat and stabbing people? I tell you, it was 
wn possible for Simon Doyle to leave his cabin.” 

Poirot said gently: “I know. That is quite true. The 
ling was impossible. It was impossible, but it was also 
ue! There could be only one logical meaning behind 
,ouise Bourget’s words. 

“So I returned to the beginning and reviewed the crime 
t the light of this new knowledge. Was it possible that 
l the period preceding the quarrel Simon Doyle had left 
le saloon and the others had forgotten or not noticed it? 
could not see that that was possible. Could the skilled 
:stimony of Dr. Bessner and Mademoiselle Bowers be dis- 
carded? Again I felt sure it could not. But, I remem- 
bered, there was a gap between the two. Simon Doyle 
l ad been alone in the saloon for a period of five minutes, 

[ tid the skilled testimony of Dr. Bessner only applied to 
lie time after that period. For that period we had only 
|jjie evidence of visual appearance, and, though apparently 
jiat was perfectly sound, it was no longer certain. What 
,ad actually been seen — leaving assumption out of the 
uestion? 

“Mademoiselle Robson had seen Mademoiselle de Belle- 
jprt fire her pistol, had seen Simon Doyle collapse onto a 
hair, had seen him clasp a handkerchief to his leg and 
:en that handkerchief gradually soak through red. What 
ad Monsieur Fanthorp heard and seen? He heard a shot, 
e found Doyle with a red-stained handkerchief clasped 
p his leg. What had happened then? Doyle had been very 
tsistent that Mademoiselle de Bellefort should be got 
way, that she should not be left alone. After that, he 
; uggested that Fanthorp should get hold of the doctor. 


Death on the Nile 


3io 

“Accordingly Mademoiselle Robson and Monsieur Fai 
thorp go out with Mademoiselle de Bellefort and for tl 
next five minutes they are busy, on the port side of tl 
deck. Mademoiselle Bowers’, Dr. Bessner’s and Mademc 
selle de Bellefort’s cabins are all on the port side. Two mil 
utes are all that Simon Doyle needs. He picks up the pi 
tol from under the sofa, slips out of his shoes, runs lil 
a hare silently along the starboard deck, enters his wife 
cabin, creeps up to her as she lies asleep, shoots her throug 1 
the head, puts the bottle that has contained the red in 
on her washstand (it mustn’t be found on him) runs bad 
gets hold of Mademoiselle Van Schuyler’s velvet stol 
which he has quietly stuffed down the side of a chair j 
readiness, muffles it round the pistol and fires a bullet int 
his leg. His chair into which he falls (in genuine agon 
this time) is by a window. He lifts the window and throv 
the pistol (wrapped up with the telltale handkerchief i 
the velvet stole) into the Nile.” 

“Impossible!” said Race. 

“No, my friend, not impossible. Remember the evidenc 
of Tim Allerton. He heard a pop —followed by a splasl 
And he heard something else— the footsteps of a man rut 
ning— a man running past his door. But nobody shoul 
have been running along the starboard side of the decl 
What he heard was the stockinged feet of Simon Doyl 
running past his cabin.” 

Race said: “I still say it’s impossible. No man could wor 
out the whole caboodle like that in a flash— especially 
chap like Doyle who is slow in his mental processes.” 

“But very quick and deft in his physical actions!” 

“That, yes. But he wouldn’t be capable of thinking th 
whole thing out.” 


Death on the Nile 


3 1 1 


“But he did not think it out himself, my friend. That 
where we were all wrong. It looked like a crime com- 
litted on the spur of the moment, but it was not a crime 
ommitted on the spur of the moment. As I say it was a 
ery cleverly planned and well thought out piece of work. 
: : could not be chance that Simon Doyle had a bottle of 
^d ink in his pocket. No, it must be design. It was not 
' hance that he had a plain unmarked handkerchief with 
im. It was not chance that Jacqueline de Bellefort’s foot 
f icked the pistol under the settee, where it would be out 
f sight and unremembered until later.” 

“Jacqueline?” 

“Certainly. The two halves of the murderer. What gave 
imon his alibi? The shot fired by Jacqueline. What gave 
!acqueline her alibi? The insistence of Simon, which re- 
ulted in a hospital nurse remaining with her all night. 
There, between the two of them, you get all the qualities 
ou require— the cool, resourceful, planning brain, Jac- 
:ueline de Bellefort’s brain, and the man of action to carry 
t out with incredible swiftness and timing. 

“Look at it the right way, and it answers every ques- 
ion. Simon Doyle and Jacqueline had been lovers. Realize 
hat they are still lovers, and it is all clear. Simon does 
way with his rich wife, inherits her money, and in due 
ourse will marry his old love. It was all very ingenious. 
The persecution of Madame Doyle by Jacqueline, all part 
! >f the plan. Simon’s pretended rage. . . . And yet— there 
vere lapses. He held forth to me once about possessive 
vomen— held forth with real bitterness. It ought to have 
>een clear to me that it was his wife he was thinking about 
-not Jacqueline. Then his manner to his wife in public. 
Vn ordinary, inarticulate Englishman, such as Simon 


312 


Death on the Nile 


Doyle, is very embarrassed at showing any affectioi 
Simon was not a really good actor. He overdid the d<i 
voted manner. That conversation I had with Mademoisel 
Jacqueline, too, when she pretended that somebody ha 
overheard. I saw no one. And there was no one! But 
was to be a useful red herring later. Then one night o 
this boat I thought I heard Simon and Linnet outside m 
cabin. He was saying, ‘We’ve got to go through with 
now.’ It was Doyle all right, but it was to Jacqueline h 
was speaking. 

“The final drama was perfectly planned and timet 
There was a sleeping draught for me, in case I might pt 
an inconvenient finger in the pie. There was the selectio 
of Mademoiselle Robson as a witness— the working up cl 
the scene. Mademoiselle de Belief ort’s exaggerated remors 
and hysterics. She made a good deal of noise, in case th 
shot should be heard. En verite, it was an extraordinaril' 
clever idea. Jacqueline says she has shot Doyle; Mademoij 
selle Robson says so; Fanthorp says so— and when Simon’ 
leg is examined he has been shot. It looks unanswerable 
For both of them there is a perfect alibi— at the cost, i 
is true, of a certain amount of pain and risk to Simo] 
Doyle, but it is necessary that his wound should definitely 
disable him. 

“And then the plan goes wrong. Louise Bourget ha 
been wakeful. She has come up the stairway and she ha 
seen Simon Doyle run along to his wife’s cabin and com< 
back. Easy enough to piece together what has happenec 
the following day. And so she makes her greedy bid foj 
hush money, and in so doing signs her death warrant.” 

“But Mr. Doyle couldn’t have killed her?” Cornelia ob- 
jected. 


Death on the Nile 


3i3 


“No, the other partner did that murder. As soon as he 
an, Simon Doyle asks to see Jacqueline. He even asks 
ie to leave them alone together. He tells her then of the 
few danger. They must act at once. He knows where 
kssner’s scalpels are kept. After the crime the scalpel is 
wiped and returned, and then, very late and rather out of 
Breath, Jacqueline de Bellefort hurries in to lunch. 

“And still all is not well, for Madame Otterbourne has 
:en Jacqueline go into Louise Bourget’s cabin. And she 
omes hot foot to tell Simon about it. Jacqueline is the 
murderess. Do you remember how Simon shouted at the 
por woman? Nerves, we thought. But the door was open 
pd he was trying to convey the danger to his accomplice, 
pe heard and she acted— acted like lightning. She remem- 
liered Pennington had talked about a revolver. She got 
|bld of it, crept up outside the door, listened and, at the 
dtical moment, fired. She boasted once that she was a 
food shot, and her boast was not an idle one. 

“I remarked after that third crime that there were three 
pays the murderer could have gone. I meant that he could 
have gone aft (in which case Tim Allerton was the crim- 
lal) he could have gone over the side (very improbable) 
Isr he could have gone into a cabin. Jacqueline’s cabin 
7 as just two away from Dr. Bessner’s. She had only to 
arow down the revolver, bolt into the cabin, ruffle her 
air and fling herself down on the bunk. It was risky, but 
was the only possible chance.” 

There was a silence, then Race asked, “What happened 
p the first bullet fired at Doyle by the girl?” 

“I think it went into the table. There is a recently made 
ole there. I think Doyle had time to dig it out with a pen- 
nife and fling it through the window. He had, of course, 


3 X 4 


Death on the Nile 


a spare cartridge, so that it would appear that only tw 
shots had been fired. 

Cornelia sighed. “They thought of everything,” she sail 
“It’s— horrible!” 

Poirot was silent. But it was not a modest silence. H 
eyes seemed to be saying: “You are wrong. They didn 
allow for Hercule Poirot.” 

Aloud he said, “And now, Doctor, we will go and hav 
a word with your patient.” 


CHAPTER XXIX 


r WAS VERY MUCH LATER THAT EVENING THAT HeRCULE 
oirot came and knocked on the door of a cabin. 

A voice said “Come in” and he entered. 

Jacqueline de Bellefort was sitting in a chair. In another 
hair, close against the wall, sat the big stewardess. 
Jacqueline’s eyes surveyed Poirot thoughtfully. She made 
gesture toward the stewardess. 

“Can she go?” 

Poirot nodded to the woman and she went out. Poirot 
rew up her chair and sat down near Jacqueline. Neither 
f them spoke. Poirot’s face was unhappy. 

In the end it was the girl who spoke first. 

“Well,” she said, “it is all over! You were too clever 
i or us, Monsieur Poirot.” 

Poirot sighed. He spread out his hands. He seemed 
xangely dumb. 

“All the same,” said Jacqueline reflectively, “I can’t 
sally see that you had much proof. You were quite right, 
f course, but if we’d bluffed you out—” 

“In no other way, Mademoiselle, could the thing have 
appened.” 

“That’s proof enough for a logical mind, but I don’t 
elieve it would have convinced a jury. Oh, well— it can’t 
e helped. You sprang it all on Simon, and he went down 
ke a ninepin. He just lost his head utterly, poor lamb, and 
dmitted everything.” She shook her head. “He’s a bad 


Death on the Nile 


316 
loser.” 

“But you, Mademoiselle, are a good loser.” 

She laughed suddenly— a queer, gay, defiant little laugh 

“Oh, yes, I’m a good loser all right.” She looked at him 

She said suddenly and impulsively: “Don’t mind s< 
much, Monsieur Poirot! About me, I mean. You do mind 
don’t you?” 

“Yes, Mademoiselle.” 

“But it wouldn’t have occurred to you to let me off?” 

Hercule Poirot said quietly, “No.” 

She nodded her head in quiet agreement. 

“No, it’s no use being sentimental. I might do it again 
. . . I’m not a safe person any longer. I can feel that my 
self. . . .” She went on broodingly: “It’s so dreadfully 
easy— killing people. And you begin to feel that it doesn’ 
matter . . . that it’s only you that matters! It’s dangerou 
—that.” 

She paused, then said with a little smile: “You did you 
best for me, you know. That night at Assuan— you tolt 
me not to open my heart to evil. . . . Did you realizi 
then what was in my mind?” 

He shook his head. 

“I only knew that what I said was true.” 

“It was true. I could have stopped, then, you know, 
nearly did. ... I could have told Simon that I wouldn’ 
go on with it. . . . But then perhaps—” 

She broke off. She said: “Would you like to hear abou 
it? From the beginning?” 

“If you care to tell me, Mademoiselle.” 

“I think I want to tell you. It was all very simple realty 
You see, Simon and I loved each other. . . .” 

It was a matter-of-fact statement, yet, underneath th 


Death on the Nile 


3i7 


ghtness of her tone, there were echoes. . . . 

Poirot said simply, “and for you love would have been 
nough, but not for him.” 

“You might put it that way, perhaps. But you don’t 
uite understand Simon. You see, he’s always wanted 
honey so dreadfully. He likes all the things you get with 
loney— horses and yachts and sport— nice things, all of 
hem, things a man ought to be keen about. And he’d 
tever been able to have any of them. He’s awfully simple, 
limon is. He wants things just as a child wants them— 
ou know— terribly. 

“All the same he never tried to marry anybody rich and 
torrid. He wasn’t that sort. And then we met— and— and 
hat sort of settled things. Only we didn’t see when we’d 
>e able to marry. He’d had rather a decent job, but he’d 
ost it. In a way it was his own fault. He tried to do some- 
hing smart over money, and got found out at once. I 
lon’t believe he really meant to be dishonest. He just 
bought it was the sort of thing people did in the City.” 

A flicker passed over her listener’s face, but he guarded 
iis tongue. 

“There we were, up against it; and then I thought of 
dnnet and her new country house, and I rushed off to 
;er. You know, Monsieur Poirot, I loved Linnet, really I 
lid. She was my best friend, and I never dreamed that 
ny thing would ever come between us. I just thought how 
iicky it was she was rich. It might make all the difference 
0 me and Simon if she’d give him a job. And she was 
wfully sweet about it and told me to bring Simon down 
!o see her. It was about then you saw us that night at 
Ihez Ma Tante. We were making whoopee, although we 
touldn’t really afford it.” 


Death on the Nile 


318 

She paused, sighed, then went on: “What I’m going t 
say now is quite true, Monsieur Poirot. Even though Lii 
net is dead, it doesn’t alter the truth. That’s why I’m n< 
really sorry about her, even now. She went all out to gi 
Simon away from me. That’s the absolute truth! I don 
think she even hesitated for more than about a minute, 
was her friend, but she didn’t care. She just went bale 
headed for Simon. . . . 

“And Simon didn’t care a damn about her! I talked 
lot to you about glamour, but of course that wasn’t trui 
He didn’t want Linnet. He thought her good-looking bi 
terribly bossy, and he hated bossy women! The wholi 
thing embarrassed him frightfully. But he did like th 
thought of her money. 

“Of course I saw that . . . and at last I suggested t 
him that it might be a good thing if he— got rid of m 
and married Linnet. But he scouted the idea. He saic 
money or no money, it would be hell to be married t 
her. He said his idea of having money was to have it him 
self— not to have a rich wife holding the purse string: 
‘I’d be a kind of damned Prince Consort,’ he said to me 
He said, too, that he didn’t want anyone but me. . . . 

“I think I know when the idea came into his head. H 
said one day, ‘If I’d any luck, I’d marry her and she’< 
die in about a year and leave me all the boodle.’ And thei 
a queer startled look came into his eyes. That was whei 
he first thought of it. . . . 

“He talked about it a good deal, one way and another- 
about how convenient it would be if Linnet died. I sai<, 
it was an awful idea, and then he shut up about it. Then 
one day, I found him reading up all about arsenic. I taxec 
him with it then, and he laughed and said: ‘Nothing ven 


Death on the Nile 


3*9 

ire, nothing have! It’s about the only time in my life 
shall be near to touching a fat lot of money.’ 

“After a bit I saw that he’d made up his mind. And I 
. ras terrified— simply terrified. Because, you see, I realized 
: rat he’d never pull it off. He’s so childishly simple. He’d 
ave no kind of subtlety about it— and he’s got no imagi- 
iiation. He would probably have just bunged arsenic into 
er and assumed the doctor would say she’d died of gas- 
ritis. He always thought things would go right. 

“So I had to come into it, too, to look after him. . . .” 

She said it very simply but in complete good faith. Poirot 
ad no doubt whatever that her motive had been exacdy 
izhat she said it was. She herself had not coveted Linnet 
Lidgeway’s money, but she had loved Simon Doyle, had 
Dved him beyond reason and beyond rectitude and beyond 
ity. 

“I thought and I thought— trying to work out a plan. It 
eemed to me that the basis of the idea ought to be a kind 
f two-handed alibi. You know— if Simon and I could 
iOmehow or other give evidence against each other, but 
ctually that evidence would clear us of everything. It 
would be easy enough for me to pretend to hate Simon, 
t was quite a likely thing to happen under the circum- 
tances. Then, if Linnet was killed, I should probably be 
uspected, so it would be better if I was suspected right 
way. We worked out details little by little. I wanted it to 
»e so that, if anything went wrong, they’d get me and 
lot Simon. But Simon was worried about me. 

“The only thing I was glad about was that I hadn’t got 
o do it. I simply couldn’t have! Not go along in cold 
l>lood and kill her when she was asleep! You see, I hadn’t 
orgiven her— I think I could have killed her face to face, 


320 


Death on the Nile 


but not the other way. . . . 

“We worked everything out carefully. Even then, Simor 
went and wrote a J in blood, which was a silly melodra 
matic thing to do. It’s just the sort of thing he 'would thinl 
of! But it went off all right.” 

Poirot nodded. 

“Yes. It was not your fault that Louise Bourget coulc 
not sleep that night. . . . And afterward, Mademoiselle?’ 

She met his eyes squarely. 

“Yes,” she said, “it’s rather horrible, isn’t it? I can’ 
believe that I— did that! I know now what you meant bj 
opening your heart to evil. . . .You know pretty wel 
how it happened. Louise made it clear to Simon that sh< 
knew. Simon got you to bring me to him. As soon as w< 
were alone together he told me what had happened. H< 
told me what I’d got to do. I wasn’t even horrified. I wa: 
so afraid— so deadly afraid. . . . That’s what murder doe: 
to you. Simon and I were safe— quite safe— except for thi 
miserable blackmailing French girl. I took her all the money 
we could get hold of. I pretended to grovel. And then 
when she was counting the money, I— did it! It was quiti 
easy. That’s what’s so horribly, horribly frightening abou 
it. . . . It’s so terribly easy. . . . 

“And even then we weren’t safe. Mrs. Otterbourne hac 
seen me. She came triumphantly along the deck looking 
for you and Colonel Race. I’d no time to think. I just actec 
like a flash. It was almost exciting. I knew it was touch o 
go that time. That seemed to make it better. . . 

She stopped again. 

“Do you remember when you came into my cabin after 
ward? You said you were not sure why you had come, 
was so miserable— so terrified. I thought Simon was goinj 


Death on the Nile 


32^.3 


to die. . . 

“And I— was hoping it,” said Poirot. 

Jacqueline nodded. 

“Yes, it would have been better for him that way.” 

“That was not my thought.” 

Jacqueline looked at the sternness of his face. 

She said gently: “Don’t mind so much for me, Monsieur 
Poirot. After all, I’ve lived hard always, you know. If we’d 
won out, I’d have been very happy and enjoyed things 
and probably should never have regretted anything. As it 
is— well, one goes through with it.” 

She added: “I suppose the stewardess is in attendance to 
see I don’t hang myself or swallow a miraculous capsule 
of prussic acid as people always do in books. You needn’t 
: be afraid! I shan’t do that. It will be easier for Simon if 
I’m standing by.” 

Poirot got up. Jacqueline rose also. She said with a sud- 
den smile: “Do you remember when I said I must follow 
•my star? You said it might be a false star. And I said, ‘That 
very bad star, that star fall down.’ ” 

He went out onto the deck with her laughter ringing 
in his ears. 


1 


CHAPTER XXX 


It was early dawn when they came into Shellal. 
The rocks came down grimly to the water’s edge. 

Poirot murmured, “Quel pays sanvage!” 

Race stood beside him. “Well,” he said, “we’ve done 
our job. I’ve arranged for Richetti to be taken ashore first. 
Glad we’ve got him. He’s been a slippery customer, I can 
tell you. Given us the slip dozens of times.” 

He went on: “We must get hold of a stretcher for 
Doyle. Remarkable how he went to pieces.” 

“Not really,” said Poirot. “That boyish type of criminal 
is usually intensely vain. Once prick the bubble of their 
self-esteem and it is finished! They go to pieces like chil- 
dren.” 

“Deserves to be hanged,” said Race. “He’s a cold- 
blooded scoundrel. I’m sorry for the girl— but there’s noth- 
ing to be done about it.” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“People say love justifies everything, but that is not 
true. . . . Women who care for men as Jacqueline cares 
for Simon Doyle are very dangerous. It is what I said when 
I saw her first. ‘She cares too much, that little one!’ It is 
true.” 

Cornelia Robson came up beside him. 

“Oh,” she said, “we’re nearly in.” 

She paused a minute or two then added, “I’ve been with 
her.” 


322 


Death on the Nile 


323 


“With Mademoiselle de Bellefort?” 

“Yes. I felt it was kind of awful for her boxed up with 
that stewardess. Cousin Marie’s very angry though, I’m 
afraid.” 

Miss Van Schuyler was progressing slowly down the 
deck toward them. Her eyes were venomous. 

“Cornelia,” she snapped, “you’ve behaved outrageously. 
I shall send you straight home.” 

Cornelia took a deep breath. “I’m sorry, Cousin Marie, 
but I’m not going home. I’m going to get married.” 

“So you’ve seen sense at last,” snapped the old lady. 

I Ferguson came striding round the corner of the deck. 
He said: “Cornelia, what’s this I hear? It’s not true!” 

“It’s quite true,” said Cornelia. “I’m going to marry Dr. 

, Bessner. He asked me last night.” 

“And why are you going to marry him?” asked Fergu- 
son furiously. “Simply because he’s rich.” 

“No, I’m not,” said Cornelia indignantly. “I like him. 
He’s kind, and he knows a lot. And I’ve always been inter- 
ested in sick folks and clinics, and I shall have just a won- 
derful life with him.” 

“Do you mean to say,” asked Mr. Ferguson incredu- 
lously, “that you’d rather marry that disgusting old man 
than Me?” 

“Yes, I would. You’re not reliable! You wouldn’t be at 
all a comfortable sort of person to live with. And he’s not 
old. He’s not fifty yet.” 

“He’s got a stomach,” said Mr. Ferguson venomously. 
“Well, I’ve got round shoulders,” retorted Cornelia. 
“What one looks like doesn’t matter. He says I really could 
help him in his work, and he’s going to teach me all about 
neuroses.” 


3 2 4 


Death on the Nile 


She moved away. Ferguson said to Poirot, “Do you think 
she really means that?” 

“Certainly.” 

“She prefers that pompous old bore to Me?” 

“Undoubtedly.” 

“The girl’s mad,” declared Ferguson. 

Poirot’s eyes twinkled. 

“She is a woman of an original mind,” he said. “It is 
probably the first time you have met one.” 

The boat drew in to the landing stage. A cordon had 
been drawn round the passengers. They had been asked to 
wait before disembarking. 

Richetti, dark faced and sullen, was marched ashore by 
two engineers. 

Then, after a certain amount of delay, a stretcher was 
brought. Simon Doyle was carried along the deck to the 
gangway. 

He looked a different man— cringing, frightened, all his 
boyish insouciance vanished. 

Jacqueline de Bellefort followed. A stewardess walked 
beside her. She was pale but otherwise looked much as 
usual. She came up to the stretcher. 

“Hullo, Simon,” she said. 

He looked up at her quickly. The old boyish look came 
back to his face for a moment. 

“I messed it up,” he said. “Lost my head and admitted 
everything! Sorry, Jackie. I’ve let you down.” 

She smiled at him then. 

“It’s all right, Simon,” she said. “A fool’s game, and 
we’ve lost. That’s all.” 

She stood aside. The bearer picked up the handles of the 
stretcher. Jacqueline bent down and tied the lace of her 


Death on the Nile 


3 25 

shoe. Then her hand went to her stocking top and she 
straightened up with something in her hand. 

There was a sharp explosive “pop.” 

Simon Doyle gave one convulsed shudder and then lay 
still. 

Jacqueline de Bellefort nodded. She stood for a minute, 
pistol in hand. She gave a fleeting smile at Poirot. 

Then, as Race jumped forward, she turned the little glit- 
tering toy against her heart and pressed the trigger. 

She sank down in a soft huddled heap. 

Race shouted, “Where the devil did she get that pistol? ” 

Poirot felt a hand on his arm. Mrs. Allerton said softly, 
“You— knew?” 

He nodded. “She had a pair of these pistols. I realized 
that when I heard that one had been found in Rosalie 
Otterbourne’s handbag the day of the search. Jacqueline 
sat at the same table as they did. When she realized that 
there was going to be a search, she slipped it into the other 
girl’s handbag. Later she went to Rosalie’s cabin and got 
it back, after having distracted her attention with a com- 
parison of lipsticks. As both she and her cabin had been 
searched yesterday, it wasn’t thought necessary to do it 
again.” 

Mrs. Allerton said, “You wanted her to take that way 
out?” 

“Yes. But she would not take it alone. That is why 
Simon Doyle has died an easier death than he deserved.” 

Mrs. Allerton shivered. “Love can be a very frightening 
thing.” 

“That is why most great love stories are tragedies.” 

Mrs. Allerton’s eyes rested upon Tim and Rosalie, stand- 
ing side by side in the sunlight, and she said suddenly and 


326 Death on the Nile 

passionately, “But thank God, there is happiness in the 
world.” 

“As you say, Madame, thank God for it.” 

Presently the passengers went ashore. 

Later the bodies of Louise Bourget and Mrs. Otterbourne 
were carried off the Karnak. 

Lastly the body of Linnet Doyle was brought ashore, 
and all over the world wires began to hum, telling the 
public that Linnet Doyle, who had been Linnet Ridgeway, 
the famous, the beautiful, the wealthy Linnet Doyle was 
dead. . . . 

Sir George Wode read about it in his London club, and 
Sterndale Rockford in New York, and Joanna South wood 
in Switzerland, and it was discussed in the bar of the Three 
Crowns in Malton-under-Wode. 

And Mr. Burnaby’s lean friend said, “Well, it didn’t 
seem fair, her having everything.” 

And Mr. Burnaby said acutely, “Well, it doesn’t seem 
to have done her much good, poor lass.” 

But after a while they stopped talking about her and 
discussed instead who was going to win the Grand Na- 
tional. For, as Mr. Ferguson was saying at that minute in 
Luxor, it is not the past that matters but the future. 





