The Floating Admiral



FOREWORD
By Simon Brett
PRESIDENT OF THE DETECTION CLUB 2001–
is appropriate that the origins of the Detection Club are shrouded in mystery.
No official archives for the organisation have ever been kept and so its history
has to be pieced together from the memoirs, correspondence, hints and
recollections of its members. One reason for this incomplete record may be that
the Club originally prided itself on being a kind of secret society, with rituals
known only to its initiates. In the days of the internet, however, such a level of
security is impossible. Indeed, an extract from the Detection Club’s most secret
rite, the Initiation of New Members, is readily accessible on Wikipedia.
So the Club’s history is, at the best, conjectural. One authority declares that it
was founded in 1932 with 26 members, but this assertion is somewhat weakened
by the fact that a letter was published in the Times Literary Supplement in 1930
and signed by “members of the Detection Club”. And the serials The Scoop and
Behind the Screen appeared in The Listener respectively in 1930 and 1931. They
were written by multiple authors, including Agatha Christie, Dorothy L. Sayers,
E. C. Bentley and Anthony Berkeley, under the name of the Detection Club, as
was this work, The Floating Admiral, whose copyright notice on the first edition
reads: “The Detection Club 1931”.
So a more likely prehistory of the Club was that round about 1928 Anthony
Berkeley Cox (who only used his first two names on his books) and other
detective writers started to meet for informal dinners, which then became more
established into the rituals of a Club. According to some sources, G. K.
Chesterton was appointed the first President—though sometimes referred to as
“Leader”—in 1930. Mind you, other authorities say that he didn’t take over the
Presidential mantle until 1932. Even the Detection Club itself is inconsistent
about the date. On its headed notepaper is stated that Chesterton’s reign began in
1932, whereas in the List of Members it says 1930. So you can really take your
pick.
What is certain, however, is that, on 11 March 1932 the “Constitution and
Rules of the Detection Club” were adopted. The opening section of this
document reads: “The Detection Club is instituted for the association of writers
of detective-novels and for promoting and continuing a mutual interest and
IT

fellowship between them.” Members had to fulfil “the following condition: That
he or she has written at least two detective-novels of admitted merit or (in
exceptional cases) one such novel; it being understood that the term ‘detectivenovel’ does not include adventure-stories or ‘thrillers’ or stories in which the
detection is not the main interest, and that it is a demerit in a detective-novel if
the author does not ‘play fair by the reader’.”
In this 1932 Constitution, the Ordinary Meetings of the Club should be “not
fewer than four in the year”, so things haven’t changed that much. In 2010—and
for many years before that—the Detection Club met three times.
What has changed is the criterion of admissibility for potential candidates.
With the great spread of crime fiction’s range, the qualification has been
extended way beyond the traditional whodunit (which is just as well, because
very few people nowadays write traditional whodunits). The current membership
certainly includes writers of “adventure-stories or ‘thrillers’ or stories in which
the detection is not the main interest”, as well as practitioners of the historical,
legal, forensic, psychopathological and other developing subgenres. Crime
fiction is a much broader church now than it was in the 1920s and 1930s, and the
Detection Club reflects that.
Some would argue that contemporary mysteries are much more varied and
frequently better written than the offerings of that so-called “Golden Age”. They
are certainly more psychologically credible than many of the works produced at
that time. They are also more serious, sometimes even to the point of taking
themselves too seriously. In crime fiction, noir is the new black.
Most of these differences could be seen as improvements, but the one thing
that has been lost with the passage of time is the sense of fun that used to be
associated with crime fiction. In her introduction to The Floating Admiral,
Dorothy L. Sayers’ description of the collaborative exercise is: “the detection
game as played out on paper by certain members of the Detection Club among
themselves.” And later she writes: “Whether the game thus played for our own
amusement will succeed in amusing other people also is for the reader to judge.”
The fact that the book is being reissued yet again suggests that there are still
plenty of readers out there willing to be amused by the game.
A lot of Golden Age crime novels were games. A murder mystery was an
intellectual challenge rather on the same level as a crossword—and it’s
interesting that the two forms of entertainment both developed around the same
time. In the days before television, in the days of country house parties, such
games were very popular. Collections of crime puzzles—like F. Tennyson
Jesse’s The Baffle Book, A Parlour Game of Mystery and Detection—sold in
large numbers. It was indeed the age of the parlour game … which hardly exists

nowadays. People don’t have parlour games. Very few of them even have
parlours.
But it is in the spirit of a parlour game that The Floating Admiral should be
approached. The idea of a serious (should I use that awful word “literary”?)
novel written by a relay of authors is incongruous. For a light-hearted work of
crime fiction, though, the concept is fun, and I think it’s clear that the writers
involved in The Floating Admiral enjoyed the intellectual challenge that faced
them.
I have been involved in a couple of collaborative ventures of this kind and I
very quickly discovered that the best job to get is that of the person who starts
the story. In the first chapter you can sprinkle clues and inconsistencies with
reckless abandon, secure in the knowledge that it won’t be you who has to tie up
all the loose ends later. As a logical consequence of this, the worst job is writing
the final chapter, pulling together all the threads of the story to produce a
credible solution to the mystery. The temptation to begin that final chapter with
the words “But it was all a dream …” is strong.
In The Floating Admiral this particular short straw was drawn by Anthony
Berkeley, which was probably just as well. The author of The Poisoned
Chocolate Case, who also, under the pseudonym of Francis Iles, produced the
classic thriller Malice Aforethought, was equipped both as whodunit plotter and
as someone who understood the psychology of the criminal mind. If he couldn’t
make sense of the ending, nobody could, and I think it’s significant that his final
chapter is entitled Clearing Up the Mess.
Berkeley is one of the contributors to The Floating Admiral whose name is
still reasonably well known, at least to crime fiction buffs. The same could be
said of Monsignor Ronald A. Knox, Freeman Wills Croft and Clemence Dane.
Agatha Christie and Dorothy L. Sayers, of course, are big hitters, seemingly
destined to endure forever, and G. K. Chesterton is still a well-known literary
figure (though the Prologue he wrote to this volume seems to bear no relation to
anything in the ensuing novel).
Some of the other contributors’ names have dropped off the radar almost
completely—except in the consciousness of dedicated collectors—but I was
interested to know a little about them, to help me visualise the composition of
the Detection Club in its early years. So here are my findings:
Canon Victor L. Whitechurch was, as his title suggests, a clergyman, whose
fictional creation Thorpe Hazell was a vegetarian railway detective, intended to
be as different as possible from Sherlock Holmes. Whitechurch was one of the
first crime writers to submit his manuscripts to Scotland Yard to check he’d got
his police procedural details right (an effort that many contemporary

practitioners of the genre still don’t bother to make).
G. D. H. (George Howard Douglas) and M. (Margaret) Cole were a husband
and wife team of crime writers. Both left-wing intellectuals, in 1931 G. D. H.
formed the Society for Socialist Inquiry and Propaganda, later to be renamed the
Socialist League. Amongst the undergraduates he taught at Oxford was the
future Prime Minister, Harold Wilson.
Henry Wade was the pseudonym of Henry Lancelot Aubrey-Fletcher, 6th
Baronet, who was awarded both the D.S.O. and the Croix de Guerre for his
bravery in the First World War. As well as writing twenty crime novels, he was
High Sheriff of Buckinghamshire.
John Rhode was one of the pseudonyms of Cecil John Charles Street. Also
writing as Miles Burton and Cecil Waye, in his lifetime he published over 140
books.
Milward Kennedy was the pseudonym of Milward Rodon Kennedy Burge, an
Oxford-educated career civil servant, who specialised in police procedurals. He
also wrote books under the androgynous name Evelyn Elder.
Edgar Jepson had an enormously varied literary career. As well as crime
novels and popular romances, he wrote children’s stories and is probably best
remembered now for his fantasy fiction. His son and daughter were both
published authors and his granddaughter is the writer Fay Weldon.
So just a few snapshots of the 1931 Detection Club members who
collaborated on The Floating Admiral. I find it intriguing to imagine the dinners
they must have shared when they cooked up the ideas for this relay novel. Also
the conversations … I’m sure, like contemporary members of the Detection
Club, though they talked a bit about the craft of crime writing, it was when they
got on to other topics that they became more energised. I can visualise religious
discussions between the Catholic convert Ronald Knox, the Anglican canon
Victor Whiteside and the Christian humanist Dorothy L. Sayers. I wonder how
the idealistic Socialism of G. D. H. and M. Cole went down with the aristocratic
Henry Wade. And, writing all those books, John Rhode must have had difficulty
finding time to attend the dinners.
But enough nostalgia. One thing I am sure of, though … The dinners of the
embryonic organisation, during which the plot of The Floating Admiral was
hatched, would have been conducted in just the same spirit of good humour and
congeniality which, I am glad to say, still characterises to-day’s Detection Club.
What can be wrong, after all, with an exclusive organisation of some sixty
members which exists, in the words of Dorothy L. Sayers, “chiefly for the
purpose of eating dinners together at suitable intervals and of talking illimitable
shop”?

INTRODUCTION
By Dorothy L. Sayers
THE FLOATING ADMIRAL
members of the official police force are invited to express an opinion
about the great detectives of fiction, they usually say with a kindly smile: “Well,
of course, it’s not the same for them as it is for us. The author knows beforehand
who did the job, and the great detective has only to pick up the clues that are laid
down for him. It’s wonderful,” they indulgently add, “the clever ideas these
authors hit upon, but we don’t think they would work very well in real life.”
There is probably much truth in these observations, and they are, in any case,
difficult to confute. If Mr. John Rhode, for example, could be induced to commit
a real murder by one of the ingeniously simple methods he so easily invents in
fiction, and if Mr. Freeman Wills Crofts, say, would undertake to pursue him,
Bradshaw in hand, from Stranraer to Saint Juan-les-Pins, then, indeed, we might
put the matter to the test. But writers of detective fiction are, as a rule, not
bloodthirsty people. They avoid physical violence, for two reasons: first, because
their murderous feelings are so efficiently blown-off in print as to have little
energy left for boiling up in action, and secondly, because they are so
accustomed to the idea that murders are made to be detected that they feel a
wholesome reluctance to put their criminal theories into practice. While, as for
doing real detecting, the fact is that few of them have the time for it, being
engaged in earning their bread and butter like reasonable citizens, unblessed with
the ample leisure of a Wimsey or a Father Brown.
But the next best thing to a genuine contest is a good game, and The Floating
Admiral is the detection game as played out on paper by certain members of the
Detection Club among themselves. And here it may be asked: What is the
Detection Club?
It is a private association of writers of detective fiction in Great Britain,
existing chiefly for the purpose of eating dinners together at suitable intervals
and of talking illimitable shop. It owes no allegiance to any publisher, nor,
though willing to turn an honest penny by offering the present venture to the
public, is it primarily concerned with making money. It is not a committee of
judges for recommending its own or other people’s books, and indeed has no
object but to amuse itself. Its membership is confined to those who have written
WHEN

genuine detective stories (not adventure tales or “thrillers”) and election is
secured by a vote of the club on recommendation by two or more members, and
involves the undertaking of an oath.
While wild horses would not drag from me any revelation of the solemn ritual
of the Detection Club, a word as to the nature of the oath is, perhaps,
permissible. Put briefly, it amounts to this: that the author pledges himself to
play the game with the public and with his fellow-authors. His detectives must
detect by their wits, without the help of accident or coincidence; he must not
invent impossible death-rays and poisons to produce solutions which no living
person could expect; he must write as good English as he can. He must preserve
inviolable secrecy concerning his fellow-members’ forthcoming plots and titles,
and he must give any assistance in his power to members who need advice on
technical points. If there is any serious aim behind the avowedly frivolous
organisation of the Detection Club, it is to keep the detective story up to the
highest standard that its nature permits, and to free it from the bad legacy of
sensationalism, clap-trap and jargon with which it was unhappily burdened in the
past.
Now, a word about the conditions under which The Floating Admiral was
written. Here, the problem was made to approach as closely as possible to a
problem of real detection. Except in the case of Mr. Chesterton’s picturesque
Prologue, which was written last, each contributor tackled the mystery presented
to him in the preceding chapters without having the slightest idea what solution
or solutions the previous authors had in mind. Two rules only were imposed.
Each writer must construct his instalment with a definite solution in view—that
is, he must not introduce new complications merely “to make it more difficult.”
He must be ready, if called upon, to explain his own clues coherently and
plausibly; and to make sure that he was playing fair in this respect, each writer
was bound to deliver, together with the manuscript of his own chapter, his own
proposed solution of the mystery. These solutions are printed at the end of the
book for the benefit of the curious reader.
Secondly, each writer was bound to deal faithfully with all the difficulties left
for his consideration by his predecessors. If Elma’s attitude towards love and
marriage appeared to fluctuate strangely, or if the boat was put into the boathouse wrong end first, those facts must form part of his solution. He must not
dismiss them as caprice or accident, or present an explanation inconsistent with
them. Naturally, as the clues became in process of time more numerous, the
suggested solutions grew more complicated and precise, while the general
outlines of the plot gradually hardened and fixed themselves. But it is
entertaining and instructive to note the surprising number of different

interpretations which may be devised to account for the simplest actions. Where
one writer may have laid down a clue, thinking that it could point only in one
obvious direction, succeeding writers have managed to make it point in a
direction exactly opposite. And it is here, perhaps, that the game approximates
most closely to real life. We judge one another by our outward actions, but in the
motive underlying those actions our judgment may be widely at fault.
Preoccupied by our own private interpretation of the matter, we can see only the
one possible motive behind the action, so that our solution may be quite
plausible, quite coherent, and quite wrong. And here, possibly, we detectivewriters may have succeeded in wholesomely surprising and confounding
ourselves and one another. We are only too much accustomed to let the great
detective say airily: “Cannot you see, my dear Watson, that these facts admit of
only one interpretation?” After our experience in the matter of The Floating
Admiral, our great detectives may have to learn to express themselves more
guardedly.
Whether the game thus played for our own amusement will succeed in
amusing other people also is for the reader to judge. We can only assure him that
the game was played honestly according to the rules, and with all the energy and
enthusiasm which the players knew how to put into it. Speaking for myself, I
may say that the helpless bewilderment into which I was plunged on receipt of
Mr. Milward Kennedy’s little bunch of brain-teasers was, apparently, fully
equalled by the hideous sensation of bafflement which overcame Father Ronald
Knox when, having, as I fondly imagined, cleared up much that was obscure, I
handed the problem on to him. That Mr. Anthony Berkeley should so cheerfully
have confounded our politics and frustrated our knavish tricks in the final
solution, I must attribute partly to his native ingenuity and partly to the energetic
interference of the other three intervening solvers, who discovered so many facts
and motives that we earlier gropers in the dark knew nothing about. But none of
us, I think, will bear any malice against our fellow-authors, any more than
against the vagaries of the River Whyn, which, powerfully guided by Mr. Henry
Wade and Mr. John Rhode, twin luminaries of its tidal waters, bore so peacefully
between its flowery banks the body of the Floating Admiral.

PROLOGUE
By G. K. Chesterton
“THE THREE PIPE DREAMS”
glimpses through the rolling smoke of opium, three stories that still hover
about a squalid opium joint in Hong Kong, might very well at this distance of
time be dismissed as pipe dreams. Yet they really happened; they were stages in
the great misfortune of a man’s life; although many who played their parts in the
drama would have forgotten it by the morning. A large paper-lantern coarsely
scrawled with a glaring crimson dragon hung over the black and almost
subterranean entrance of the den; the moon was up and the little street was
almost deserted.
We all talk of the mystery of Asia; and there is a sense in which we are all
wrong. Asia has been hardened by the ages; it is old, so that its bones stick out;
and in one sense there is less disguise and mystification about it than there is
about the more living and moving problems of the West. The dope-peddlers and
opium hags and harlots who made the dingy life of that place were fixed and
recognised in their functions, in something almost like a social hierarchy;
sometimes their vice was official and almost religious, as in the dancing-girls of
the temples. But the English naval officer who strode at that instant past that
door, and had occasion to pause there, was in reality much more of a mystery;
for he was a mystery even to himself. There were bound up in his character, both
national and individual, the most complex and contradictory things; codes and
compromises about codes, and a conscience strangely fitful and illogical;
sentimental instincts that recoiled from sentiment and religious feelings that had
outlived religion; a patriotism that prided itself on being merely practical and
professional; all the tangled traditions of a great Pagan and a great Christian
past; the mystery of the West. It grew more and more mysterious, because he
himself never thought about it.
Indeed there is only one part of it that anybody need think about for the
purposes of this tale. Like every man of his type, he had a perfectly sincere
hatred of individual oppression; which would not have saved him from taking
part in impersonal or collective oppression, if the responsibility were spread to
all his civilisation or his country or his class. He was the Captain of a battleship
lying at that moment in the harbour of Hong Kong. He would have shelled Hong
THREE

Kong to pieces and killed half the people in it, even if it had been in that
shameful war by which Great Britain forced opium upon China. But when he
happened to see one individual Chinese girl being dragged across the road by a
greasy, yellow ruffian, and flung head-foremost into the opium-den, something
sprang up quite spontaneously within him; an “age” that is never really past; and
certain romances that were not really burned by the Barber; something that does
still deserve the glorious insult of being called quixotic. With two or three
battering blows he sent the Chinaman spinning across the road, where he
collapsed in a distant gutter. But the girl had already been flung down the steps
of the dark entry, and he precipitated himself after her with the purely instinctive
impetuosity of a charging bull. There was very little in his mind at that moment
except rage and a very vague intention of delivering the captive from so
uninviting a dungeon. But even over such a simple mood a wave of unconscious
warning seemed to pass; the blood-red dragon-lantern seemed to leer down at
him; and he had some such blind sensation as might have overwhelmed St.
George if, charging with a victorious lance, he had found himself swallowed by
the dragon.

And yet the next scene revealed, in a rift of that visionary vapour, is not any
such scene of doom or punishment as some sensationalists might legitimately
expect. It will not be necessary to gratify the refined modern taste with scenes of
torture; nor to avoid the vulgarity of a happy ending by killing the principal
character in the first chapter. Nevertheless, the scene revealed was perhaps, in its
ultimate effects, almost more tragic than a scene of death. The most tragic thing
about it was that it was rather comic. The gleam of the tawdry lanterns in the
dope-den revealed nothing but a huddle of drugged coolies, with faces like
yellow stone, the sailors from a ship that had put into Hong Kong that morning,
flying the Stars and Stripes; and the final feature of a tall English naval officer,
wearing the uniform of the Captain of a British ship, behaving in a peculiar way
and apparently under rather peculiar influences. It was believed by some that
what he was performing was a horn-pipe, but that it was mingled with motions
designed only to preserve equilibrium.
The crew looking on was American; that is to say, some of them were
Swedish, several Polish, several more Slavs of nameless nationality, and a large
number of brown Lascars from the ends of the earth. But they all saw something
that they very much wanted to see and had never seen before. They saw an
English gentleman unbend. He unbent with luxuriant slowness and then
suddenly bent double again and slid to the floor with a bang. He was understood

to say:
“Dam’ bad whisky but dam’ good. WhadImeansay is,” he explained with
laborious logic, “whisky dam’ bad, but dam’ bad whisky dam’ good thing.”
“He’s had more than whisky,” said one of the Swedish sailors in Swedish
American.
“He’s had everything there is to have, I should think,” replied a Pole with a
refined accent.
And then a little swarthy Jew, who was born in Budapest but had lived in
Whitechapel, struck up in piping tones a song he had heard there: “Every nice
girl loves a sailor.” And in his song there was a sneer that was some day to be
seen on the face of Trotsky, and to change the world.

The dawn gives us the third glimpse of the harbour of Hong Kong, where the
battleship flying the Stars and Stripes lay with the other battleship flying the
Union Jack; and on the latter ship there was turmoil and blank dismay. The First
and Second Officers looked at each other with growing alertness and alarm, and
one of them looked at a watch.
“Can you suggest anything, Mr. Lutterell?” said one of them, with a sharp
voice but a very vague eye.
“I think we shall have to send somebody ashore to find out,” replied Mr.
Lutterell.
At this point a third officer appeared hauling forward a heavy and reluctant
seaman; who was supposed to have some information to give, but seemed to
have some difficulty in giving it.
“Well, you see, sir, he’s been found,” he said at last. “The Captain’s been
found.”
Something in his tone moved the First Officer to sudden horror.
“What do you mean by found?” he cried. “You talk as if he was dead!”
“Well, I don’t think he’s dead,” said the sailor with irritating slowness. “But
he looked dead-like.”
“I’m afraid, sir,” said the Second Officer in a low voice, “that they’re just
bringing him in. I hope they’ll be quick and keep it as quiet as they can.”
Under these circumstances did the First Officer look up and behold his
respected Captain returning to his beloved ship. He was being carried like a sack
by two dirty-looking coolies, and the officers hastily closed round him and
carried him to his cabin. Then Mr. Lutterell turned sharply and sent for the ship’s
doctor.
“Hold these men for the moment,” he said, pointing to the coolies; “we’ve got

to know about this. Now then, Doctor, what’s the matter with him?”
The doctor was a hard-headed, hatchet-faced man, having the not very popular
character of a candid friend; and on this occasion he was very candid indeed.
“I can see and smell for myself,” he said, “before I begin the examination.
He’s had opium and whisky as well as Heaven knows what else. I should say
he’s a bag of poisons.”
“Any wounds at all?” asked the frowning Lutterell.
“I should say he’s knocked himself out,” said the candid doctor. “Most likely
knocked himself out of the Service.”
“You have no right to say that,” said the First Officer severely. “That is for the
authorities.”
“Yes,” said the other doggedly. “Authorities of a Court Martial, I should say.
No; there are no wounds.”
Thus do the first three stages of the story reach their conclusion; and it must
be admitted with regret that so far there is no moral to the story.

CHAPTER I
By Canon Victor L. Whitechurch
CORPSE AHOY!
in Lingham knew old Neddy Ware, though he was not a native of the
village, having only resided there for the last ten years; which, in the eyes of the
older inhabitants who had spent the whole of their lives in that quiet spot,
constituted him still a “stranger.”
Not that they really knew very much about him, for the old man was of a
retiring disposition and had few cronies. What they did know was that he was a
retired petty officer of the Royal Navy, subsisting on his pension, that he was
wholeheartedly devoted to the Waltonian craft, spending most of his time fishing
in the River Whyn, and that, though he was of a peaceful disposition generally,
he had a vocabulary of awful and blood-curdling swearwords if anyone upset
him by interfering with his sport.
If you, being a fellow-fisherman, took up your position on the bank of the
River Whyn in a spot which Neddy Ware considered to be too near his, he would
let drive at you with alarming emphasis; if boys—his pet aversion—annoyed
him in any way by chattering around him, his language became totally unfit for
juvenile ears. Once young Harry Ayres, the village champion where fisticuffs
were concerned, had the temerity to throw a stone at the old man’s float; he
slunk back home afterwards, white in face and utterly cowed with the torrent of
Neddy Ware’s lurid remarks.
He lived in a small cottage standing quite by itself on the outskirts of the
village, and he lived there alone. Mrs. Lambert, a widow, went to his cottage for
a couple of hours every morning to tidy up and cook his midday meal. For the
rest, Neddy Ware managed quite well.
He came out of his cottage one August morning as the church clock, some
half a mile distant, was striking four. Those who knew his habits would have
seen nothing unusual in his rising so early. The fisherman knows the value of
those first morning hours; besides which, the little River Whyn, which was the
scene of his favourite occupation, was tidal for some five or six miles from the
sea. For those five or six miles it meandered, first through a low valley, flanked
by the open downs on one side and by wooded heights on the other, and then
made its way, for the last four miles, through a flat, lowlying country till it
EVERYONE

finally entered the Channel at Whynmouth. Everyone knows Whynmouth as a
favourite South Coast holiday resort, possessing a small harbour at the mouth of
its river.
Twice a day the tide flowed up the Whyn, more or less rapidly according to
whether it was “spring” or “neap.” And this fact had an important bearing on the
times which were favourable for angling. On this particular morning Neddy
Ware had planned to be on the river bank a little while after the incoming tide
had begun to flow up the stream.
Behold him, then, as he came out of his cottage, half-way up the wooded
slopes of “Lingham Hangar,” crossed the high road, and made his way down to
the level of the river. He was fairly on in years, but carried those years well, so
much so that there was only just a sprinkling of grey in his coal-black hair. A
sturdy-looking man, cleanshaven, but with a curious, old-fashioned twist of hair
allowed to grow long on either side of his head just in front of his ears; brown,
weatherbeaten, lined face, humorous mouth and keen, grey eyes. Dressed in an
old navy blue serge suit, and wearing—as he invariably did—a black bowler hat.
Carrying rods, landing net, and a capacious basket containing all kinds of the
impedimenta of his craft.
He reached the grassy bank of the river, put his things on the ground, and very
slowly filled a blackened clay pipe with twist tobacco—which he rubbed in his
hands first—and proceeded to light it, glancing up and down the river as he did
so.
Where he was standing the river took a curve, and he was on the outer side of
this curve, on the right bank. Away to the left the stream bent itself between the
heights on the one side and open meadows on the other. To the right, bending
away from him, was the flat country, the river’s edges bordered with tallgrowing reeds. From this direction the tide was flowing towards him, swirling
round the bend.
His first task was to haul in three or four eel lines he had thrown out the
evening before, the ends being tied to the gnarled roots of a small tree growing
on the bank. Two of the lines brought to land a couple of fair-sized eels, and,
very dexterously, he detached the slippery, twisting fish from the hooks, washing
the slime off afterwards. Then, slowly, he commenced putting one of his rods
together, arranging his tackle, baiting with worms, and casting into the stream.
For some little time he watched the float bobbing about in the swirl of the
eddies, now and again striking when it suddenly disappeared beneath the
surface, once landing a fish.
He glanced around. Suddenly his float lost interest. He was gazing downstream, as far as he could see around the bend. Slowly a small rowing-boat was

coming up-stream. But there was something peculiar about her. No oars were in
evidence. She appeared to be drifting.
The old sailor was quick to recognise the little craft.
“Ah,” he muttered, “that’s the Vicar’s boat.”
Lingham Vicarage stood, with its adjacent church, quite apart from the village
proper, about half a mile down the river. The grounds ran down to the water’s
edge, where there was a rough landing-stage. The Vicar, he knew, kept his boat
at this stage, moored by her painter to a convenient post. There was a little creek
running into the grounds, with a wooden boat-house, but, in the summer months,
especially when the Vicar’s two boys were home from school, the boat was
generally kept on the river itself.
As it came nearer, Ware laid down his rod. He could see now that there was
someone in the boat—not seated, but, apparently, lying in the bottom of her,
astern.
The boat was only about fifty yards away now. The swirl of the tide was
bringing her round the outer side of the bend in the river, but Neddy Ware, who
knew every current, saw that she would pass beyond his reach. With the quick
action of the sailor he did not waste an instant. Diving into his basket he
produced one of the coiled up eel lines with its heavy, lead plummet. And then
stood in readiness, uncoiling the line and throwing the slack on the grass.
On came the boat, about a dozen yards from the bank. Skilfully he threw the
plummet into her bows, and then started walking along the bank up-stream,
gently but steadily pulling on the line till, at length, he brought her close up to
the bank and laid hold of the painter at her bows. The end of the painter was
dragging in the water. As he pulled it out he glanced at it. It had been cut.
He made it fast to a tree-root. The boat swung round, stern up-stream,
alongside the bank. And Ware got into her. The next moment he was on his
knees, bending over the man who lay in the stern.
He lay there on his back, his knees slightly hunched up, his arms at his sides,
quite still. A man of about sixty, with iron-grey hair, moustache and closecropped, pointed beard, dark eyes open with fixed stare. He was clad in evening
dress clothes and a brown overcoat, the latter open at the front and exposing a
white shirt-front stained with blood.
Sitting on one of the seats, Ware made a swift examination of the boat.
A pair of oars lay in her, the metal rowlocks were unshipped. Apparently the
dead man was hatless—no—there was a hat in the boat, lying in the bows; a
round, black, clerical hat, such as Mr. Mount, the Vicar, usually wore.
Neddy Ware, having looked around, got out of the boat and glanced at his
watch. Ten minutes to five. Then, leaving the little craft moored to the bank, he

hurried off as fast as he could go, gained the high road, which was some hundred
yards away from the river, and started in the direction of the village.
Police Constable Hempstead, just on the point of turning into bed after having
been on duty all night, looked out of the window in answer to Ware’s knock at
the door.
“What is it, Mr. Ware?” he asked.
“Something pretty bad, I’m afraid.”
Hempstead, wide awake now, slipped on his clothes again, came down and
opened the door. Ware told him what had happened.
“I must get the Inspector out from Whynmouth—and a doctor,” said the
constable, “I’ll phone to the station there.”
He came out again in two or three minutes.
“All right,” he said. “They’ll run over in a car at once. Now you come along
with me and show me that boat and what’s in it. You haven’t been messing
about with anything—moving the body and so on, I hope?”
“I shouldn’t be such a fool,” replied Ware.
“That’s all right. You haven’t seen anyone else?”
“No one.”
The policeman went on asking questions from time to time as they hurried
along. He was a smart man, this young constable, eager for his stripes, and
wanted to make the most of the opportunity. As soon as they reached the river
bank he took a glance at the boat and its contents, and exclaimed:
“Hullo! Don’t you know who that is, Mr. Ware?”
“Never saw him before that I know of. Who is he?”
“Why, it’s Admiral Penistone. He lives at Rundel Croft—that big house the
other side of the river just opposite the Vicarage. Leastways, he’s been in
residence there about a month. He only bought it last June. A new-comer.”
“Oh! Admiral Penistone, is he?” said Neddy Ware.
“That’s the man, right enough. But, look here: are you sure this is the
Vicarage boat?”
“Certain.”
“Queer, eh? That seems to mean something happened this side of the river, for
of course there’s no bridge till you get to Fernton—three miles lower down. Ah,
and the parson’s hat, eh? Let’s see; what time did you first see the boat coming
along?”
“A little after half-past four, I should say.”
Hempstead had his notebook out and was making pencilled jottings in it. Then
he said:
“Look here, Mr. Ware, I want you, if you will, to go back to the road and stop

Inspector Rudge when he comes along in his car.”
“Very well,” replied Ware; “nothing more I can do?”
“Not yet, at any rate.”
Hempstead was an astute man. He waited until Neddy Ware was out of the
way before he began a little examination on his own account. He knew very well
that his superior officer would take the case fully in hand, but he was anxious to
see what he could, without disturbing anything, in the meantime.
As he got into the boat, he noticed a folded newspaper, half sticking out of the
dead man’s overcoat pocket. He took it out, gingerly, looked at it, and replaced
it.
“Ah,” he murmured, “the Evening Gazette, last night’s late London edition.
He wouldn’t get that here. The nearest place where it’s sold is Whynmouth.”
He would very much have liked to examine the contents of all the pockets of
the dead man’s clothes, but felt he had better not. So he got out of the boat, sat
down on the bank, and waited.
After a bit the sound of a car running along the main road was heard, and in a
minute or two, four men came across the meadow; Neddy Ware, a police
inspector in uniform, and two men in plain clothes, one of them a doctor, the
other a detective-sergeant.
Inspector Rudge was a tall, thin man, with sallow, cleanshaven face. He came
up to Hempstead.
“You haven’t moved anything?” he asked curtly.
“No, sir.”
Rudge turned to the doctor.
“I won’t do anything, Doctor Grice, till you have made your examination.”
Doctor Grice got into the boat and proceeded to examine the body. It was only
a few minutes before he said:
“Stabbed to the heart, Inspector, with some narrow-bladed instrument—a thin
knife or dagger. Death must have been instantaneous. There’ll have to be a postmortem, of course.”
“How long has he been dead?”
“Some hours. He probably died before midnight.”
“Nothing more?”
“Not at present, Inspector.”
“Very well. I’ll have a look now.”
He turned the body over, shifting it slightly.
“No sign of blood under him,” he said, “or anywhere else in the boat that I can
see. Let’s have a look in his pockets—ah, it wasn’t robbery. Gold watch and
chain—wallet full of notes—they were not after that. Evening paper here—last

night’s date. That must be noted. Now—we’ve got to be as quick as possible.
Tell me, Hempstead, what do you know about him?”
“He’s Admiral Penistone, sir. Retired. A new-comer hereabouts. Bought
Rundel Croft, a big house on the other side of the river, a few months ago. Took
up residence there lately. I believe he has a niece living with him. But it’s not in
my district, sir.”
“I know.”
The Inspector turned to Ware.
“You say the boat belongs to the Vicar here?”
“Yes.”
“How long would it take for the tide to bring it up from his place?”
“Forty to forty-five minutes,” replied Ware promptly, “with the tide as it is today.”
“I see. Now, the question is how are we to move him? We might pull the boat
back against the tide. Won’t do, though. Those oars must be tested for fingerprints before they are handled. Let’s see—Vicarage on the telephone,
Hempstead?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All right. I’ll go there now. I want to see the Vicar. We’ll phone to
Whynmouth for an ambulance. Have to run him to Rundel Croft round by
Fernton Bridge. You remain here, Hempstead, and if anyone comes along don’t
let ’em touch anything. I shall want you, Sergeant—we’ll have to put you across
the river from the Vicarage if we can get a boat there; I want you to mount guard
over the Admiral’s boat and boat-house. Perhaps you won’t mind coming too,
Mr. Ware. You may be useful. There! We’ll get a move on. Come along,
Doctor.”
In a very short time the Inspector was driving the car down the short bit of
road leading from the highway to the Vicarage. The front door of the latter faced
the river, a lawn stretching down to the bank. Opposite, about a hundred yards
from the bank, stood a large, red-brick, Tudor mansion, with a broad sweep of
lawn in front and a boat-house.
The Inspector, the Vicar’s hat in his hand, got out of the car and rang the bell;
the others followed. It was a few minutes before the maid, who evidently had
only just come down, opened the door and said her master was not up yet.
“Will you kindly tell him that Inspector Rudge wants to see him at once. Say
I’m sorry to disturb him, but it’s most important.”
“I’ll tell him, sir. Won’t you come in?”
“Thank you, no. I’ll wait here.”
“Hullo, I say, are you a policeman?”

He turned. Two boys had come across the lawn, aged, respectively, about
sixteen and fourteen, dressed in flannel trousers and shirts open at the neck, and
carrying bathing towels. They were regarding him eagerly.
“Yes,” he said, “I am.”
“Good egg!” exclaimed the elder, “just what we want, isn’t he, Alec? Look
here; some blighter has taken our boat—cut the painter. Perhaps you’ve heard
about it, though? Is that what you’ve come about?”
The Inspector smiled grimly.
“Yes—that’s what I’ve come about, young gentlemen,” he replied, dryly, “but
you needn’t worry about your boat. It’s been found.”
“Hooray!” exclaimed the other boy. “Got the beggar who took it?”
“Not yet,” said Rudge, with another grim little smile, “that may not be so
easy. Have you got another boat handy?” he asked.
“Only our old punt—she’s in the boat-house.”
“Well, do you two young gentlemen think you could manage to put my
detective-sergeant here across the water in her? He wants to pay a call at Rundel
Croft.”
“Rather!” Peter Mount looked with boyish admiration at the sergeant. “Is
there going to be a man-hunt? Cheerio! We’ll help you. But you don’t suspect
old Admiral Penistone of sneaking our boat, do you? He crossed back in his own
last night. He’d been dining here, you know.”
“Oh, had he!” said the Inspector. “No, we don’t suspect him. Now—will you
do what I asked?”
“Come on,” said Alec to Sergeant Appleton, “the tide’s running pretty strong,
but we’ll put you across all right.”
They went down to the boat-house with the sergeant.
“Good morning, Inspector. Good morning, Doctor Grice—ah—it’s you,
Ware, I see. What’s the meaning of this early morning deputation?”
The Vicar had come out of the house; a man of about fifty, of medium height,
sturdily built, with clear-cut features and hair a little grey. He asked the question
of the Inspector, who replied:
“I’ll explain directly, Mr. Mount. Is this your hat?”
The Vicar took it and looked at it.
“Yes; certainly it is.”
“Then would you mind telling me if you remember when you had it last?”
“That is quite simple. To be absolutely accurate, at twenty minutes past ten
last evening.”
“And where?”
“You are very mysterious, Inspector. But I’ll tell you. My neighbour who

lives opposite was dining with us last evening, with his niece. They left just
about ten. I went down to the river to see them off, and put my hat on. After the
Admiral had crossed the stream in his boat with his niece I sat down in that little
summer-house and smoked a pipe. I took off my hat and laid it on the seat beside
me—and, absent-mindedly, I forgot to put it on again when I returned to the
house. It was then that I set my watch by the clock in the hall—twenty minutes
past ten. But will you tell me why you ask me this—and what you have all come
about?”
“I will, sir. This hat was found in your boat early this morning. Your boat was
drifting with the tide up-stream. And in her was the dead body of your opposite
neighbour, Admiral Penistone—murdered, Mr. Mount.”

CHAPTER II
By G. D. H. and M. Cole
BREAKING THE NEWS
“MURDERED! Good God!” the Vicar said—and it was well known, the Inspector
reflected, that the Vicar of Lingham had a ridiculously exaggerated respect for
the Third Commandment. He had stepped back a pace at the shock of the news,
and some of the colour was fading from his cheeks. “But—murdered. … How—
what do you mean, Inspector?”
“I mean,” said Rudge, “that Admiral Penistone was stabbed to the heart some
time before midnight last night—and his body placed in your boat.”
“But what—why … ? How could he have been?”
“And your hat,” the Inspector remorselessly amplified, “was lying in the boat
beside him. So you see,” he added, “that the first thing I had to do was to make
enquiries at your house.”
The Vicar turned on his heel abruptly. “Come into my study,” he said. “We
can talk better there—I don’t suppose you want my sons, at present?” The
Inspector shook his head, and followed him into a quiet, brown room with wide
sash windows, the very model of what a clerical study, owned by a none too tidy
cleric, should be. As he led the way in, the Vicar stumbled over something, and
with a little gasp caught hold of the table for support. “You—you must excuse
me,” he muttered, as he motioned the Inspector to a chair and sank into one
himself. “This is—a very great shock. Now, will you tell me what I can do for
you?”
Rudge scanned him a minute before replying. Undoubtedly he had received a
very great shock. He was pale; his hands were none too steady; and his breath
was coming and going quickly. Whether the cause was merely the sudden
impact of violent death on a sheltered clerical life, or whether there was some
graver reason, the Inspector did not know enough to decide. At any rate, there
was no sense in causing further alarm at the moment. So when he spoke it was in
a gentle reassuring tone.
“What I want to find out immediately, Mr. Mount, is exactly what happened
last night, as far as you know it. Admiral Penistone, you say, came over to dine
with his niece—what is the lady’s name, by the way?”
“Fitzgerald—Miss Elma Fitzgerald. She is his sister’s daughter, I understand.”

“About what age?”
“Oh—I should say a year or two over thirty.”
“Thank you. They arrived—when?”
“Just before seven-thirty. In their boat.”
“And left?”
“Slightly after ten. I can’t fix it to the minute, I’m afraid; but they were just
taking their leave when the church clock struck, and Admiral Penistone said,
‘Hurry up, I want to get back before midnight’—or something of that sort; and
within a very few minutes they were gone.”
“And you saw them off?”
“Yes. I went down to the landing-stage with them, and Peter—that’s my eldest
son—helped them to start. It’s sometimes a little awkward getting off, if the
current is running strongly.”
“Did you actually see them land?”
“Yes. It wasn’t dark. I watched them take the boat into the Admiral’s boathouse, and then, a little later, I saw them come out of the boat-house, and go up
to the house.”
“I should have thought those trees at the back of the boat-house would have
screened them from you,” said the Inspector, who had made good use of his
eyes. “Or do you mean they were crossing the lawn?”
The Vicar looked at him with respect. “No, they were in the trees,” he said.
“But Miss Fitzgerald had on a white dress, and I saw it showing through them.”
“But Admiral Penistone hadn’t a white dress?”
“No. … I suppose,” the Vicar reflected, “that now you mention it I couldn’t
say I saw the Admiral leave the boat-house—but seeing his niece I naturally
concluded he was with her.”
“Very naturally,” Rudge concurred soothingly. “And you yourself stayed out
smoking until—?”
“Twenty past ten.”
“And then?”
“I locked the house up and went to bed.”
“And you heard nothing more of your neighbour?”
“Nothing,” said the Vicar. “Nothing at all,” he repeated more loudly.
“What about your sons? Or your servants? Would they have heard anything?”
“I don’t think so. They had all gone to bed when I came in.”
“Thank you. Now, Mr. Mount, can you tell me this? Did Admiral Penistone
seem in his usual spirits during the evening?”
The question appeared to distress the Vicar. “I—I don’t think I can really
answer that,” he said. “You see, I haven’t known the Admiral at all long. He has

only recently come to the neighbourhood. … I really hardly know him.”
“But still,” Rudge persisted, “you might have noticed if he seemed distressed,
or worried in any way. Did he?” And, seeing the Vicar still hesitated, he pressed
his point. “If you did notice anything, Mr. Mount, I really think you should tell
me. It’s of the highest importance that we should find out everything we can
about the poor gentleman’s state of mind at the time—and I assure you I know
how to be discreet.”
“Well,” said the Vicar, fidgeting a little. “Well … it’s nothing, probably. But I
should say—yes—that the Admiral was perhaps a little worried. He was not as
—as amiable as usual. And he was generally a very pleasant man—not at all
snappish.”
“He was snappish with Miss Fitzgerald, perhaps?” the Inspector suggested
quickly; and the Vicar blinked.
“Oh, no … hardly … I shouldn’t say that at all.”
“But he acted as though there was something on his mind. … I suppose
you’ve no idea what it was?”
“I think—I don’t know—it may have been his niece’s marriage. He said
something about it. Nothing much.”
“Oh, she’s getting married, is she? Who to?”
“Somebody called Holland, Arthur Holland. From London, I think. I don’t
know him.”
“And Admiral Penistone didn’t approve?”
“I don’t mean that. I mean, I don’t know. He didn’t say. Only he seemed as
though something might have gone a little wrong. Perhaps it was to do with her
settlements; she has a good deal of money, as I understand, and the Admiral is—
was her trustee. But I really don’t know anything about it.”
“I see. Had you, yourself, known Admiral Penistone long?”
“Only since he came here, about a month ago. I called on him, you know; and
we got acquainted.”
“And you saw each other fairly often?”
“Oh, two or three times in the week, perhaps. Not more.”
“Ever hear him speak of any enemies—anyone who’d have a reason for
killing him?”
“Oh, no, no!” The Vicar looked shocked, but hastened to add, “Of course, I
really know nothing of his life before he came here.”
“Had he many friends? In the neighbourhood? Or outside? Where did he live
before?”
“Somewhere in the West, I believe. I don’t remember his ever telling me the
district. I don’t think he knew many people about here well. Sir Wilfrid Denny,

over at West End, saw most of him, I fancy. I believe he had old friends down to
meet him, sometimes.”
“Ever meet any of them yourself?”
“Oh, no,” said the Vicar.
“I see. Well, I think I’d better be getting over to his place now,” the Inspector
said. “I’m very much obliged to you, Mr. Mount. I’ll want to have a word with
your sons and your servants some time, just in case any of them noticed anything
that might help us. But that can wait. By the way,” he turned at the door to add,
“can you tell me what sort of a young lady Miss Fitzgerald is? Liable to—to be
very upset, I mean?”
The Vicar smiled a little, almost in spite of himself. “I shouldn’t think so,” he
said. “I don’t think Miss Fitzgerald is at all the fainting type.”
“Very devoted to her uncle, eh?”
“I couldn’t say, particularly. About as much as most nieces are to their uncles,
I imagine. Perhaps she is rather a reserved young woman—has interests of her
own. But this is just gossip—you can see for yourself what you think,
Inspector.”
“That’s true enough. Well, I’ll be going,” the Inspector said, and noted the
expression of relief which overspread the Vicar’s face. “I know we aren’t
popular visitors,” he thought to himself, “at the best of times. But need he show
quite so plainly how glad he is to get rid of me? I wonder if there could be any
other reason—if he knows anything more than he’s said. But—the Vicar of
Lingham, and a most respectable Vicar, from all I’ve ever heard of him! I must
say it doesn’t sound likely.” And, so thinking, he made his way back to the car,
and drove rapidly the three miles or so which he had to cover to reach the house
a hundred yards away.
It was close on eight o’clock by the time he reached his destination; but
Rundel Croft obviously did not keep early hours. One or two of the windows
facing him still had their blinds down; and the hall, when he was admitted to it,
was obviously undergoing its matutinal clean-up. A rather down-at-heels butler,
of the type which seems to have become a butler because its wife is a good cook
and itself has no special ability of any kind, opened the door to him and blinked
uneasily in his face. Rudge asked for Miss Fitzgerald, and was told that she was
not yet about. Apparently she always breakfasted in bed. Rudge then asked for
Admiral Penistone.
“He’s in his room, still,” the butler said, looking faintly hostile, as though he
did not approve of early morning visitors.
“No, he isn’t,” Rudge said sharply. “He’s had an accident.” The butler
goggled at him. “Look here—what’s your name?”

“Emery.”
“Look here, Emery, I’m Inspector Rudge from Whynmouth, and I must see
Miss Fitzgerald at once. Admiral Penistone has met with a very serious accident
—in fact, he’s dead. Will you find Miss Fitzgerald’s maid, if she has one, and
tell her that I want to speak to Miss Fitzgerald as soon as she can possibly come
down. And come back here when you’ve done it. I want a word with you.”
With no more than an inarticulate noise the butler shuffled off, and it was ten
minutes or so before he returned, with the news that Miss Fitzgerald would be
down in a quarter of an hour. The Inspector took him aside into a square, rather
beautiful morning-room, and began questioning him about his master’s
movements of the night before. But he got very little help from his interview. It
seemed to him that the man must be either phenomenally stupid or else dazed
with shock at his master’s death; and yet the latter did not seem to be the case.
Beyond a muttering or two of “Dear, dear!” and the like, he hardly appeared to
have taken in the news; and the Inspector felt some surprise that a retired naval
officer should keep so incompetent-looking a servant. Yet the house appeared
well cleaned, if it did rouse itself somewhat late in the day.
Admiral Penistone, the Inspector learned, had last been seen by his staff at
about a quarter past seven on the previous evening, when he and his niece had
gone down to the boat-house to row themselves over to the Vicarage. (He never
allowed anyone to disturb him in the morning until he rang, which accounted for
his absence being unknown.) As he was going to the boat-house, he had told
Emery that he need not wait up, but was to lock the front of the house and go to
bed, leaving the french window of the drawing-room, which led to the lawn and
the river, unbolted. “I was to lock it,” Emery said, “but Admiral Penistone
always had his own key.”
“Stop a moment. Was this window bolted when you came down this morning,
or not?”
“No,” Emery said; but added that that didn’t mean anything. Half the time the
Admiral didn’t bolt it. It was locked, and nobody was likely to come burgling
from the riverside.
Then he hadn’t seen the Admiral again? No. Or Miss Fitzgerald? Yes, so to
speak. He meant that, as he and his wife were going up to bed, a bit after ten,
might have been quarter-past, they’d seen Miss Fitzgerald coming up the path
from the boat-house. At least, they’d seen her dress; they couldn’t see her
properly in the dark. The Admiral wasn’t with her then; but they supposed he
was behind, locking up the boat-house. No, he didn’t know if the boat-house was
locked now; he supposed it was, but it wasn’t his work to go down to the boathouse. No, he couldn’t say they’d actually seen Miss Fitzgerald come in; she

might have, or she might have stopped on the lawn. He and his wife weren’t
particularly noticing; they were going to bed.
And that was all Emery had to say. Questioned about his late master’s mood
of the previous evening, he seemed to have no idea, and simply stared with a
moon-faced imbecility. He “supposed he was much as usual.” The Admiral was
occasionally “short” with his servants (the Inspector reflected that it would take
a saint not to be short with Emery at least a dozen times a day); but beyond that
his butler had nothing to say. Masters, apparently, were phenomena that were
occasionally short, like pastry; but one accepted the fact, and did not conjecture
about the cause. At least, not if one were as limp and uninterested as Emery
appeared. No, his wife and he had only been a month with the Admiral; they had
applied for the post from an advertisement; they were last with a lady and
gentleman in Hove, for a year and a half. At this point, somewhat to Rudge’s
relief, a much more intelligent-looking maidservant appeared, and announced
that Miss Fitzgerald was awaiting him in the dining-room.
“She’s ugly!” was the Inspector’s immediate reaction on first beholding the
niece of the late Admiral Penistone. And then: “No, I’m not so sure that she
would be, in some lights. But she’d take a good bit of making-up, I shouldn’t
wonder. And, jiminy! isn’t she sulky-looking!”
Miss Elma Fitzgerald was very pale. But it was not the pallor of fear for a
possible accident to her uncle, but that peculiar to a very thick, opaque skin. She
was big and heavily-made, with long limbs and broad shoulders, and would have
been better suited, obviously, by long trailing draperies than by the tweed skirt
and jumper which she had rather carelessly put on. She had largish, stronglymarked, but roughly-designed features, with a wide jaw and full chin, and dark
brows nearly meeting in her white face. Her hair was dark and coarse, done in
flat plaits around her ears, and under her eyes, which were so little open that the
Inspector could not at first glance determine their colour, were lines and dark
pouches. She was, to him, distinctly unattractive; and “a year or two over thirty”
was, he thought, a generous description. Yet she was certainly a woman of
personality, and in a kinder light and with artificial aids to lighten her skin and
hide the disfiguring lines, she might even have been attractive.
“Yes?” she said in a voice that contrived to have a rasp and a drawl
simultaneously. “What do you want?” At any rate, the Inspector thought, she
was not going to waste his time.
“I am sorry to have to tell you, Miss Fitzgerald,” said he, “that Admiral
Penistone has met with a serious accident.”
“Is he dead?” The tone was so matter-of-fact that the Inspector jumped
slightly.

“I am afraid he is. But did you—were you expecting—?”
“Oh, no.” Still she had not raised her eyes. “But that’s the way the police
always break things to one, don’t they? What happened?”
“I’m sorry to say,” said the Inspector, “that the Admiral was murdered.”
“Murdered?” At that the eyes did open wide for a moment. They were grey,
very dark grey. They would have been fine eyes, Rudge noted, if the lashes had
been longer. “But—why?”
As that was exactly what the Inspector wanted to know himself, he was
momentarily brought to a stop.
“His body was found,” he said, “at half-past four this morning, drifting in a
boat up-stream and stabbed to the heart.” Miss Fitzgerald merely bowed her
head in acquiescence, and seemed waiting for him to continue. “Damn her!” the
Inspector thought. “Hasn’t she got any natural feelings? You’d think I’d told her
there was a cat on the lawn!” Aloud he said: “I’m afraid this must come as a
good deal of a shock to you, madam.”
“You need not consider my feelings, Inspector,” said Elma Fitzgerald, with a
glance which said, more plainly than words: “And it is a gross impertinence on
your part to make any enquiries into them!” “I suppose you have some idea why
—this happened? Or who did it?”
“I am afraid I don’t see it very clearly yet,” the Inspector said. “I wondered—
if you could …”
“I can’t,” said Miss Fitzgerald with decision. “I haven’t any idea”—she spoke
slowly—“why anyone—anyone at all—should want to kill my uncle. I suppose
—” But the sentence stopped there. Whatever it was she supposed, the Inspector,
wait as he might, was not to be privy to it. “What do you want me to tell you?”
she continued at length. (“I wish you’d be quick and go about your business,”
her voice conveyed.)
“Just this, madam,” the Inspector said. “When did you last see Admiral
Penistone?”
“Last night. When we came back from dining at the Vicarage.”
“What time would that be?” The Inspector believed in getting his information
confirmed from as many sources as possible.
“Oh … a little after ten, I think. It struck ten just before we left.”
“And you rowed across, and came up to the house with the Admiral?”
“No, he didn’t come up to the house when I did. He was locking the boathouse, and he said he thought he’d like a cigar before he went to bed. So I said
good night to him, and came straight up to the house.”
“Was there anyone about when you came in?” “No; but Emery and his wife
had only just gone to bed, I think. I saw the lights going on and off as I came up.

They must have been shutting up the house.” “And then—what did you do?”
“I came straight up, and went to bed myself.”
“You didn’t hear Admiral Penistone come in?”
“No. But I wasn’t listening particularly. He often stays up quite late, walking
about,” said Miss Fitzgerald.
“I gather,” said the Inspector, “that Admiral Penistone, last night, appeared
rather worried and distressed?”
“I don’t think so. … No. Why should he have been?”
“You hadn’t had a—a disagreement with him at all?”
“You mean,” said Miss Fitzgerald with disconcerting penetration, “about my
marriage. That—is—pure—gossip.” There was a considerable amount of
contempt in her tone. “My uncle was not in the least opposed to my marriage.
He was a little worried, I believe, about the best way of arranging the money
side of it—but that was only a question which would settle itself, in time. That
was all.” But there must be a little more to it, the Inspector swiftly reflected, or
she wouldn’t have tumbled so quick to what I was talking about.
“Then you can’t suggest at all what was worrying him?”
“I don’t think for a moment there was anything,” said Miss Fitzgerald; and
made a slight movement that at least suggested a gesture of dismissal.
“I see. Well …” The Inspector would have liked to continue the interview, but
did not see, at the moment, exactly what other information he could well
demand. And it was perhaps hardly in the best of taste to sit there pestering a
lady in her first grief—if she was grieved. There was a sudden twitch of a strong,
rather large hand, that suggested more emotion than appeared on the surface, at
any rate. “Just one more thing, Miss Fitzgerald, and then I need not trouble you
further. Can you give me the name of Admiral Penistone’s lawyers?”
“Dakers and Dakers. They live somewhere in Lincoln’s Inn, I think.”
“Thank you. And if I could see Admiral Penistone’s papers now—and the
servants—”
“I think all his papers are in the study. Emery will show you.” Miss Fitzgerald
leaned across and touched the bell. “Inspector,” she said, a little suddenly, “will
you tell me—what happens? Will they be bringing him—here?” It was the first
trace of real emotion her voice had shown, and Rudge hastened to assure her that
the body would be taken to the mortuary, and that every effort would be made to
spare her as much as possible.
“Thank you,” she said, returning to indifference again; and at that moment
Emery shuffled in. “Emery, take the Inspector to the Admiral’s study, and let
him see anything he wants to. And you’d better none of you go out of the house.
The Inspector may want to speak to you.” She leaned back in her chair, and

made no movement, as Rudge, looking, he hoped, not as puzzled as he felt,
followed Emery out of the room.
The Admiral’s study was a large and pleasant room on the first floor, looking
out upon the lawn and the river. It was in fairly good order, though it had
obviously not been cleaned this morning, and there were a few papers, dating
probably from the previous evening, lying untidily upon the desk. Rudge took in
the appearance of the room with a practised eye, and reflected that it ought not to
take long to make it yield up any secrets it possessed. Then he dismissed the
hovering Emery. “And you’re not to let anybody into the house for the present,
please, without asking me about it,” were his final instructions. Emery, with a
muttered “Very good,” shuffled off again.
The desk and a small filing cabinet which stood beside it were the only likely
receptacles for papers in the room. The filing cabinet, when opened, disclosed
nothing but newspaper cuttings neatly sorted. The desk was locked, but Rudge
had prudently possessed himself of the dead man’s keys, and he very soon had it
open. The first thing which he found was a pistol, perfectly clean and fully
loaded, lying all by itself in a little drawer. He formed his mouth into the shape
of a soundless whistle, and proceeded to unearth writing-paper and envelopes, a
drawer full of pipes, another with a few letters of recent date, another with bankbooks, stub-ends of cheque-books, income-tax forms and other financial
paraphernalia, and a fifth which contained only a large legal envelope inscribed
Elma Fitzgerald. In view of what the Vicar had said, the Inspector conjectured
that the contents of this envelope might possibly have some bearing upon his
case, and he settled himself down to study them as a preliminary. The first item
was the “Last Will and Testament of John Martin Fitzgerald,” bulky and wordy
beyond even the normal run of such documents; and the Inspector, whose
mastery of legal jargon was not as thorough as he could have wished, found
some trouble in disentangling its provisions. He had succeeded in making out
that John Martin Fitzgerald was the Admiral’s brother-in-law, and that his will
devised his property, whatever that might be, in equal proportions to his son
Walter Everett Fitzgerald, “if he should be found to be alive at the date of my
death,” and his daughter Elma Fitzgerald; and had noted that if the son turned
out to be dead (“I suppose he must have disappeared or something. It’s a funny
way to put it anyhow.”) Elma Fitzgerald would get all the property on her
marriage—when his attention was arrested by what sounded like an altercation
below-stairs. For a moment or two he listened, and judged that, in spite of his
orders, some visitor must be trying to force an entrance into the house. And as he
strongly mistrusted Emery’s power to oppose even a determined fly, he went
down into the hall to see what it was all about, and found, as he had anticipated,

a pink and perplexed butler feebly flapping at an enraged visitor who had
already penetrated as far as the foot of the stairs.
“—the Inspector said—” he was bleating.
“To hell with the Inspector!” the intruder retorted; and, glancing up, found
himself looking straight into the eyes of the said Inspector—a contingency
which disconcerted him not at all.
Nor need it have done so. Whoever he was, the intruder was easily capable of
dealing with a dozen inspectors. He must have been six foot three at the very
least, with the build and gait of an athlete, and an athlete, moreover, who
specialised in events requiring exceptional strength. Above a pair of
magnificently broad shoulders was set a handsome head with sunburned face
and neck, a square chin, and short aquiline nose, brown hair cropped so close
that it could hardly indulge its natural curls, and big, fiery, hazel eyes, which
glared up at Rudge with all the righteous indignation of a supporter of Law and
Justice resenting the interference of Law with his own avocations.
“I told Mr. Holland,” Emery bleated, “that you’d said nobody was to be let in
without orders.”
“And I told him,” Mr. Holland remarked, “that I was coming in.”
“You’re Mr. Holland?” the Inspector said. “Mr. Arthur Holland?” Holland
nodded. “And you want to see—?”
“I’ve come to see Miss Fitzgerald,” Arthur Holland said. “And let me tell you
I’m in a hurry, whoever you are. Here, Emery, go and tell Miss Fitzgerald I’m
here, and be quick about it, will you?”
“Half a moment, sir,” the Inspector said, while a maidservant came out of one
of the rooms opening into the hall, and began to whisper to the butler. “If you’ll
excuse me, I want a word or two with you myself, first. Did this man tell you
that Admiral Penistone has—?”
“Been killed? Yes,” the young man said. “Is that any reason why I shouldn’t
see Miss Fitzgerald? She’ll need someone—”
“Beg pardon, sir.” Emery approached deferentially. “But Miss Fitzgerald’s
away.”
“Away!” The exclamation burst from both men simultaneously.
“Yes, sir. She’s just had her bag packed, and driven off in her car, Merton
says.” He indicated the maidservant in the hall. “Not ten minutes ago, sir.”
“Whew!” With an internal whistle the Inspector brooded on this new
development.

CHAPTER III
By Henry Wade
BRIGHT THOUGHTS ON TIDES
frowning with annoyance at the escape of this important witness, Inspector
Rudge turned to his companion.
“If you’ll kindly step into the study, sir,” he said, “there are some questions
that I’d like to ask you.”
“They’ll have to wait,” said Holland curtly, turning towards the front door.
“I’m going to find Miss Fitzgerald.”
“No, sir!” There was a ring of authority in the Inspector’s voice that brought
even the masterful Holland up with a round turn. Rudge was not going to lose
two witnesses before he had done with them.
“I must ask you to attend to me first, sir, please. I shall not detain you longer
than I can help.”
“With a wry smile, Arthur Holland followed the Inspector into the study and,
declining a chair, leant his back against the tall mantelpiece.
“Well, what is it?” he asked. “Fire away.”
Rudge took out his notebook and made a show of preparing to take down vital
information. He had often found this effective with recalcitrant witnesses.
“Your full name, sir, please?”
“Arthur Holland.”
“Age?”
“Thirty-three.”
“Address?”
“Lord Marshall Hotel, Whynmouth.”
Rudge looked up.
“That’s not your permanent address, sir?”
“I hope not.”
“Then may I have it, sir, please?”
“I haven’t got one.”
The Inspector’s eyebrows lifted, and he opened his mouth as if to argue the
point but, changing his mind, licked his pencil and wrote down, audibly:
“No permanent address.”
After a moment’s thought he continued:
STILL

“Occupation?”
“I’m a trader.”
Rudge looked slightly puzzled.
“Commercial traveller, sir?”
“Good God, no! I trade in raw materials—rubber, jute, ivory—that sort of
thing.”
“In London, sir?”
Holland writhed with impatience.
“They don’t grow in London, man. I’m in England now, fixing up markets.”
“Ah!” The Inspector felt as if he were getting nearer the bone. “Then will you
tell me, sir, in what part of the world you get your raw material for the London
market?”
“I didn’t say the London market. I said I was in London to fix up markets—
London’s only a centre, the markets may be in any part of the world.”
The policeman’s irritatingly stupid questions were drawing more information
out of Arthur Holland than he had intended to give.
“Quite, sir; but you haven’t answered my question. In what part of the world
do you yourself get the material for which you are trying to find a market?”
“Oh, wherever I think the going’s good at the moment,” replied Holland
airily. “Burma, Kenya, S.A., India—I move about.”
Holland hesitated.
“It won’t be very difficult for me to find out, sir,” said Rudge quietly. “Better
for you to tell me.”
The reply came slowly—almost unwillingly:
“China.”
“I see, sir. And no particular or permanent address in China?”
“No.”
Inspector Rudge whisked over a page and started afresh.
“Now about last night, sir. Were you at the Lord Marshall last night?”
“Yes, I was.”
“You arrived at … ?”
“I got to Whynmouth just before nine.”
“Ah; by the express?”
“Yes.”
“From London?”
“Yes.”
“And you spent the evening … where?”
“In Whynmouth.”
“You didn’t come out here to see your young lady?”

“I knew she was dining out. I stayed in Whynmouth.”
“Very patient of you, sir. You remained in the hotel?”
“I had a stroll by the sea after dinner. I went to bed early.”
“Perhaps there would be someone who would be able to confirm what you say
about your movements, sir?”
The Inspector’s voice was casual—too casual. Holland’s eyes narrowed.
“Are you suspecting me of killing the Admiral?” he asked harshly.
“Oh, dear, no; oh, dear, no. Why, I didn’t even know of your existence till an
hour or so ago. Funny, isn’t it? No; that’s just routine. We like to know—and if
possible to confirm—the whereabouts of everyone in any way connected with
the deceased at the time of the crime. I just thought it possible you might know
of someone who could confirm your statement.”
“How can anyone prove whether I was in bed or not? I happen to make a
practice of sleeping alone. Funny, isn’t it?” quoted Holland with a sneer.
“Ah, then you know the crime was committed after you went to bed?”
Holland stared.
“How the devil should I? I’ve only just heard of it.”
“Quite, sir; quite. Like me only just hearing of you. Now about Miss
Fitzgerald. Have you any idea where she’s gone?”
“Not the slightest.”
“But when you were dashing off to find her just now, you must have had some
idea of where to look.”
“She might have gone to London.”
“And you might be able to find her in London?”
“I might.”
“Then perhaps it would be as well if you did, and asked her to return here
without delay.”
Holland nodded.
“I’ll tell her, but she’s likely to please herself about that.”
“It’ll be wise if she pleases herself by coming back, sir. You’ll keep in touch
with us, in any case, won’t you, sir?”
Holland halted, with his hand on the door.
“Does that mean that I’m to be under observation or whatever you call it?”
“I shan’t put a man on to watch you, sir, but I’d like you to keep in touch.”
With a grunt Miss Fitzgerald’s “young man” swung open the door and strode
out of the room. There was a smile on Inspector Rudge’s face as he pressed the
bell.
“I’d like to see Miss Fitzgerald’s maid—Merton, I think you said her name
was—please, Emery.”

A minute later Merton was sitting on the edge of a chair, nervously eyeing the
formidable Police Inspector. She was a fresh-looking English girl of about
twenty-six, attractive without being actually pretty, and evidently intelligent.
Inspector Rudge decided at once to put her at her ease—one of his favourite
alternatives of examination.
“‘Merton’ they call you?” he said with a friendly smile. “Sounds a bit formal
to me. I expect you’ve got another name, eh?”
“Jennie’s my Christian name, sir.”
“Ah, that’s better. Well, Jennie, this is a sad affair and I don’t want to upset
you more than I can help, but I must just ask you a few questions about your
employers. You see, I don’t know anything of them; not been here long, have
they?”
“No, sir; only about a month.”
“Were you with them before they came here?”
“Oh, no; I come from Whynmouth myself. I’ve only been here three weeks.”
“Ah, so Miss Fitzgerald didn’t bring a maid with her when she came?”
“Oh, yes, she did—a French one—Mademoiselle Blanc she called herself, but
Miss Fitzgerald called her Célie. She didn’t stay long—told the other girls the
place was like a mortuary—‘dead-house’ she called it—I don’t know whether
she meant Rundel Croft or Whynmouth, but I suppose she thought it was dull.
Anyway she packed up and went off without waiting for her month, nor yet her
wages, so the girls say. Miss Fitzgerald had to go to Marlow’s Agency for
another maid in a hurry and as they hadn’t got one but they knew I’d been in a
maid’s situation but I’m living with mother now—she’s not well—they asked
me, and I consented to oblige.”
The last sentence, though rather involved, had the merit of explaining the
situation. Inspector Rudge nodded.
“I see; so you don’t really know Miss Fitzgerald very well.”
“Not so very, but I’m not blind.”
“I’m sure not. What did you see?”
“Just that they didn’t look much like an uncle and niece to me.”
“Oh, they didn’t? Why not?”
“The way she spoke to him—sharp and sarcastic—more like a wife, I should
say. Not that I mean there was anything wrong.”
“But he was old enough to be her uncle—or her father, wasn’t he?”
“Oh, yes—if you think that matters.”
“Did they seem fond of each other?”
“Not so as you’d notice it.”
“Rather the reverse in fact?”

“Well, of course, I really couldn’t say. It’s not my place to be with them—
only with her.”
Jennie evidently felt that she had said too much already.
“Well, about her then. You knew that she was engaged to this Mr. Holland, of
course?”
“So she told me.”
“Did she seem to be in love with him?”
“I’m sure I couldn’t say.”
“You didn’t see them together much?”
“Not so much. But I never saw them kissing or holding hands.”
“Ah!” Here evidently was significance—a criterion.
“Now tell me, Jennie, did Miss Fitzgerald care about her appearance?”
Jennie stared.
“Funny your asking that, sir. It always puzzled me. Sometimes she didn’t and
sometimes she did. She’d be downright plain some days—like she was this
morning—and then she’d take and do herself up till she looked real handsome.”
“And when did she do that? When her young man was coming?”
“I never could make out when she did or why she did—but it wasn’t for him.
Last night she was lovely—took over an hour to dress, when she usually flung
her things off and on in five minutes. That white dress she wore was her
favourite—it was chiffon with an overcoat of cream lace; she always wore a
coloured flower—artificial—with it.”
“Ah! I’d like to have a look at that dress sometime,” said Rudge. “I’ve heard it
mentioned more than once.”
“Well now, that’s another funny thing,” said Jennie, who was now fully at her
ease—as Rudge had intended. “She’s taken it with her! She only told me to pack
sleeping things and a change of underclothes and stockings, but she must have
packed that herself after I’d done.”
“But didn’t you take it away—to brush, or whatever you do to it—when you
called her this morning?” asked the Inspector, fumbling with half-guessed
mysteries.
“Well now, there you are again! I didn’t call her before you came—she likes
to sleep late. But when I went to tell her you were here I went to pick up her
dress and shoes and things to take away, but she snapped at me fierce and told
me to go away, she wanted to get up. Of course, I went, but when she’d come
down to see you, I went back to get them—and they were gone!”
“Gone! All the clothes she wore last night?”
“The dress and shoes and stockings were.”
“Didn’t you look for them?”

“Of course I did. They weren’t anywhere.”
“So that’s why you think she took them with her?”
“Well, she must have. Where else could they be?”
Inspector Rudge looked thoughtfully at the girl, then nodded his head and
drew out the notebook which had not previously appeared at this interview.
“I see, Jennie; thank you. I won’t keep you longer now. Don’t tell anyone else
about that dress and things, but have a good hunt and, if you find them, let me
know.”
When the girl had gone, Inspector Rudge sat back in his chair and pondered
what he had just heard. The maid’s judgment as to the relations existing between
Elma Fitzgerald and her uncle, and again between her and her fiancé, might be at
fault; the question of Miss Fitzgerald’s spasmodic attention to her appearance
was at present beyond him; but surely the disappearance of the dress and shoes
which she had been wearing at the time of the tragedy—or at any rate on the
evening of the tragedy—was significant? Could she be in some way connected
with her uncle’s death? She had appeared neither surprised nor distressed when
she heard of it, but if she had been guilty—or even cognisant of it—would she
not have feigned both? However, it was too early yet to indulge in surmise—let
alone theories; there were many facts to be collected first.
To begin with, the newspaper. How had it come into the dead man’s pocket?
Rudge happened to know that the late London edition of the Evening Gazette did
not reach Whynmouth till 8.50—the express by which, incidentally, Arthur
Holland had arrived. No doubt a copy would be delivered at Rundel Croft, but
that could not be till about 9 p.m. and the Admiral had left the house at 7.15 for
his dinner at the Vicarage. Unless he had got a copy from the Vicarage, that
seemed to imply that Penistone had returned to Rundel Croft after leaving the
Vicarage at 10 p.m.—but then why was the paper in his overcoat pocket? Had he
gone back to fetch it in order to read it out of doors—surely that was
inconceivable? Or had he, on his way back to Rundel Croft, met someone who
gave him the paper—not the delivery boy, it was too late for that. Someone,
perhaps, who had brought the paper out with him—had brought it, perhaps, from
London—Arthur Holland, for instance? Holland, who had spent the evening by
the seashore and then gone early to bed—by himself. But here again was surmise
—facts were what he wanted. Rudge rang the bell.
“Emery, did your master take in the late London Evening Gazette?”
“Yes, sir. Tolwhistle’s boy brings it out of an evening—gets here about nine.”
“Did it get here last night?”
“Yes, sir,” said Emery, a faint look of surprise on his stodgy face.
“Where did you put it?”

“In the hall, sir.”
“Is it still there?”
“I couldn’t say.”
“Go and have a look, and if it’s not there, find out whether it’s been tidied
away.”
Looking more surprised than ever, Emery slouched out of the door. Rudge
thought it would probably be ten minutes at least before the tortoise-like butler
returned, so he reached for the telephone which stood upon the writing-table and
put a call through to Tolwhistle’s, the Whynmouth stationer. The number was
engaged, and while he waited Rudge let his mind drift back to the missing dress.
He remembered that when he sent Emery off to ask Miss Fitzgerald to come and
see him it was ten minutes before the butler returned and then it was with the
information that Miss Fitzgerald would be down in a quarter of an hour. There
was, in fact, an interval of twenty-five minutes between his despatching his
message and the arrival of Miss Fitzgerald. Did her appearance—slovenly in the
extreme—justify or explain such a long delay? Was it possible that the
mysterious “niece” had spent part of the time in hiding the clothes she had … ?
The telephone bell trilled.
“Tolwhistle’s? I want to speak to Mr. Tolwhistle, please. That you, Mr.
Tolwhistle? Inspector Rudge here. I want some information; quite confidential.
Sounds trivial, but isn’t. Do you supply the Reverend Mount, Vicar of Lingham,
with newspapers? You do. Does he have a late London Evening Gazette? Left it
off at the end of last year? Said what? Oh, spoilt the morning’s—yes, I see. Any
chance of anyone else supplying him? No, you’d have heard of it, of course.
Thank you, Mr. Tolwhistle. Keep my questions to yourself. I’ll explain them
some day.”
That settled the question of whether the Admiral had got the paper from the
Vicarage; there remained the two alternatives of his having come back to the
house, fetched his own paper, and gone out again, or having met someone
outside who had for some reason given him the paper.
Impatient at the long absence of Emery, Rudge went to look for him. There
was no sign of the butler, but Police Constable Hempstead was standing in the
hall.
“I came to report that the body has been taken to the undertaker’s, sir. I
formally handed it over and obtained a receipt.”
The Inspector blinked. Here was efficiency carried to full stretch.
“Right,” he said. “This house isn’t in your district, I think you said?”
“No, sir, but the corpse was found in it.”
“And you think it your duty to see that its presence is accounted for?”

“That’s for you to say, sir.”
Rudge grinned. He knew that this keen-eyed young constable was itching to
be “in” the investigation.
“All right,” he said. “Here’s a job for you; go down to the boat-house and find
out from Sergeant Appleton whether he’s found anything significant. No. I’ll
come with you. If there’s anything, I shall want to see it for myself and we
mustn’t keep our detective-sergeant there all day.”
And so, forgetting all about the newspaper, Inspector Rudge accompanied
P.C. Hempstead across the park to the boat-house. As he went, he asked his
subordinate whether anything particular had struck him about the case.
“One or two things, sir. In the first place, the body’s clothes were almost dry
—the back quite dry. But there was a heavy dew last night. If he had been lying
about in grass, or even in the boat, since midnight (Doctor Grice fixed the time
of death, you remember, sir, as before midnight) wouldn’t the clothes have been
wet?”
Inspector Rudge eyed his companion with interest.
“From which you infer … ?” he asked.
“That the Admiral was killed indoors and kept indoors—or at any rate under
cover—for some time after he was killed.”
The Inspector was silent for so long that Hempstead began to fear that he had
exceeded his duty. Just as they reached the boat-house, however, Rudge said:
“That’s a neat point; we’ll talk about it later. Ah, Appleton, sorry to keep you
waiting. Found anything?”
Detective-Sergeant Appleton was a square, solemn-looking man, valuable as a
detective rather for his persistence in following up small clues than for any
brilliance in deducing theories from them.
“Only two suggestive points, sir. This boat’s very clean and rather wet inside
—looks as if it might have been swabbed out recently. That’s one; the other is
that its bow’s facing inwards. The Vicar’s sons tell me that the Admiral always
used to go in stern first, so as to be facing the right way when the boat went out
again.”
“Ah, Navy trick, eh? That’s worth noting. Nothing else? No blood, signs of
struggle, footmarks, finger-prints?”
“No to the first two, sir. There are one or two good footmarks I’ve covered
over with boards and there look to be plenty of finger-prints all over the boat and
sculls.”
“We’ll have to examine them later. Any theories, Appleton?”
“None, sir.”
Inspector Rudge sat down on the bank and motioned to his subordinates to

join him.
“Light up,” he said, pulling a pipe out of his pocket. “Think better smoking,
and we must think now. The Vicar’s hat, in the first place; why was it in the
boat?”
“Put there by the guilty party to throw suspicion on the Vicar,” hazarded
Sergeant Appleton.
“Improve on that, Hempstead?”
“The other alternative is that the Vicar left it there himself, sir, and forgot he
had.”
“He stated positively that he had his hat on when he saw the Admiral off after
dinner last night and that he left it on the seat in the summer-house.”
“But supposing he went out in the boat after that, sir?”
“Ah, you mean … well, never mind what you mean. Now, why was the
painter cut?”
“Someone was in a hurry,” said Appleton.
“Someone wanted to suggest that the boat was stolen,” murmured Hempstead.
“And the rowlocks were unshipped,” the Inspector added his quota of surmise,
“either because the body was dumped into the Vicar’s boat from another and the
boat then cut adrift, or … to suggest that explanation, eh, Hempstead?”
“Possibly, sir.”
“Now, can anyone explain why the body was found where it was and when it
was?” asked the Inspector, adding to himself, “and if it was.”
Sergeant Appleton brightened.
“Yes, sir,” he said. “I thought that out while I was waiting. If the murder was
committed at midnight, as Doctor Grice says, and the boat cut adrift then, it
would have gone right out to sea, because the tide was at full ebb then. My
theory is that the murder was committed several miles up-stream and that before
the boat reached Whynmouth the tide turned and it floated back to where it was
found.”
“What time did the tide turn?”
“According to Mr. Ware, sir,” said Hempstead, “it turned about 3.45 a.m.”
“Well, let’s work this out. He told us, you remember, Hempstead, that it
would have taken forty to forty-five minutes for the boat to get from the
Vicarage to the spot where he was when it reached him; what time was that?”
“Just after 4.30 a.m., sir.”
“That means it left—or passed—the Vicarage at about 3.50 a.m.—only five
minutes after the tide turned?”
“That’s right, sir.”
“Then that means that if it was set adrift from here or from the Vicarage it

must have been only just before 3.45 a.m.—otherwise it couldn’t have got back
to where Ware found it by the time it did. But it’s nearly light by 3.45—they
wouldn’t have left it as late as that. It looks as if Appleton’s theory was the right
one.”
Sergeant Appleton beamed, but P.C. Hempstead looked mulish. Rudge
noticed the look.
“Out with it, Hempstead,” he said. “You’ve got a theory, I can see.”
“Well, sir, if I might make the suggestion, you’ve overlooked slack tide. For
an hour or so before the turn the tide’s so slack that it’s barely running. It’s
possible that a boat might fetch up against the bank for quite a time. My theory,
as you know, sir, is that the body wasn’t in the boat long enough for the dew to
make the clothes wet. I think it was set adrift from here about 2.30 or 3 a.m. If
the person who did it was a stranger to the place he might not think of the river
being tidal—he’d expect the boat to float straight out to sea. But what happened
was that it floated a few hundred yards, and then, as the tide slackened, drifted
into the bank; at 3.45, when the tide turned, it drifted off again and so floated up
on the flow till it reached the spot where Neddy Ware found it at half past four.”

CHAPTER IV
By Agatha Christie
MAINLY CONVERSATION
“THAT’S a pretty good theory too,” said Rudge.
He always believed in being diplomatic with his inferiors. In this instance,
nothing in his face showed which of the two theories struck him as being the
right one.
He nodded his head once or twice and then rose to his feet. He looked behind
him at the trees near the boat-house.
“There’s one thing that strikes me,” he said. “I wonder if there’s anything in
it?”
Appleton and Hempstead looked at him enquiringly.
“In my conversation with the Vicar, he mentioned that he had seen Miss
Fitzgerald’s white dress through the trees.”
“As she was going up to the house, sir—yes, I remember his saying that.
Anything fishy about that, do you think, sir?”
“No, I imagine it’s perfectly possible. Miss Fitzgerald was wearing a white
chiffon dress with a cream lace coat. If the Vicar saw the dress, then clearly she
was not wearing any coat or cloak over it. After all, why should she? It was quite
a warm night.”
“Yes, sir.”
Appleton looked puzzled.
“On the other hand, the Admiral, when he was found, was wearing a thick
brown overcoat. Anything strike you as odd about that?”
“Well—yes, I suppose it is a little queer—that the lady shouldn’t have had
anything warmer in the way of a wrap than a lace coat, and that the Admiral—
yes, sir, I take your meaning.”
“I’m going to ask you, Sergeant, to take a boat across to the Vicarage and ask
there if the Admiral was wearing a coat last night.”
“Right, sir.”
When the sergeant had departed, the Inspector turned to Hempstead.
“Now,” he said with a twinkle; “I’m going to ask you a question.”
“Yes, sir?”
“Who is the biggest talker in Whynmouth?”

P.C. Hempstead grinned in spite of himself.
“Mrs. Davis, sir, who keeps the Lord Marshall. Nobody else can get a word in
edgeways when she’s about.”
“One of that kind, is she?”
“Yes, indeed, sir.”
“Well, that will just suit me. The Admiral was a new-comer to the place.
There’s always talk about a new-comer. For ninety-nine false rumours, there will
be one true thing that somebody has noticed and observed. Attention has been
focussed on Rundel Croft. I want to know just what has transpired in village
gossip.”
“Then it’s Mrs. Davis you want, sir.”
“I want to go over to West End too, and see Sir Wilfrid Denny. He seems to
be the only person in the neighbourhood who knows anything about the
murdered man. He might possibly know whether the Admiral had any enemies.”
“You think he was in hiding, sir?”
“Not exactly in hiding. He came here openly, under his own name. It’s not an
unusual thing for a retired naval man to do. But the loaded revolver in the desk
tells a tale. That’s not so usual. I could do with knowing a little more about
Admiral Penistone’s career. Ah! here comes the sergeant back again.”
The sergeant, however, did not return alone. With him were the two boys from
the Vicarage. Their eager, boyish faces were alight with curiosity.
“I say, Inspector,” cried Peter, “can’t we help in any way? Haven’t you got a
job for us of any kind? Fancy old Penistone, of all people, to get murdered!”
“Why do you say ‘of all people,’ young gentleman?” enquired the Inspector.
“Oh! I don’t know.” The boy flushed. “He was so very—well, correct and
nautical. All present and shipshape! Sort of old fellow who’d look at you if you
forgot to call him ‘sir’ even once.”
“A martinet and a disciplinarian, eh?”
“I suppose that’s what I mean. Years behind the times.”
“I don’t think he was a bad old geezer,” said Alec tolerantly.
The Inspector turned to Appleton.
“What about the coat?”
“The Admiral, sir, was not wearing a coat when he came to dinner last night.”
“Rather not,” said Peter. “Just nip across the river and there you are. Why
should he wear a coat? The Fitzgerald hadn’t got one either.”
“Wasn’t she sweet?” minced Alec. “All in white like a blushing bride. And
old as the hills really.”
“Well,” said Rudge. “I must be getting along.”
“Oh, but, Inspector, what about us?”

Rudge smiled indulgently.
“Suppose you two young gentlemen have a look for the weapon,” he
suggested. “It wasn’t in the wound. Somewhere along the river bank maybe. …”
He retreated, smiling to himself.
“That’ll keep ’em busy,” he said to himself. “And do no harm either. They
might even come across it—stranger things have happened.”
As he got into his car and drove in the direction of Whynmouth, his brain
worked busily. The evening paper was now accounted for. The Admiral must
have returned to the house some time between ten o’clock and midnight, donned
an overcoat and slipped the evening paper into his overcoat pocket. Then he had
gone out again—where?
Had he taken the boat? Had he gone either up-stream or down-stream to keep
some appointment? Had he walked to some house near by?
As yet, the whole thing was a mystery.
On arrival at Whynmouth, Rudge pulled up opposite the Lord Marshall Hotel.
The Lord Marshall prided itself on its old-world air. The hall was dark and
narrow and an intending visitor was bewildered by finding no one to whom to
apply. Usually, deceived by the general dimness, application was made to a
guest who repulsed the new-comer frostily. On the walls were sporting prints of
a humorous nature and several glass cases containing fish.
Rudge knew his way about the Lord Marshall well enough. He crossed the
passage and tapped at a door marked “Private.” The high-pitched voice of Mrs.
Davis bid him enter.
At sight of him the lady took a deep breath and began without wasting a
minute:
“Inspector Rudge, isn’t it? And it’s well I know you by sight, as indeed for the
matter of that I know everybody in these parts. And not only by sight, too, for
we’ve passed a remark now and again though I dare say you don’t remember.
But there, as I always say, to be well known to the police isn’t what you might
call a compliment and I’m just as well pleased that we haven’t, as you might say,
really met before. And I can tell you this, Inspector Rudge, you couldn’t have
done a wiser thing than come straight to me this morning! Seeing that you’re a
new-comer in the place—only been here two years, haven’t you, or is it three?—
I declare time does run away. That’s what I’m always saying. No sooner is one
meal over than it’s time for another. And dinner I will have served to time.
These newfangled people arriving in cars, eight o’clock, nine o’clock, even, and
wanting dinner. Cold supper, I can manage, I says, but dinner is served at seven
o’clock, and then everyone’s free to walk about and very pleasant it is around
the harbour on a summer evening, and so the young people think—and even the

older ones!”
Feeling the need of refilling her lungs, Mrs. Davis paused for an infinitesimal
moment. She was a jolly, good-humoured-looking woman of fifty, dressed in
black silk. She wore a gold locket and several rings.
Without allowing Rudge a chance to speak, she swept straight on:
“You needn’t tell me what you’ve come about. It’s Admiral Penistone. Got
the news half an hour ago, I did. And ‘Well,’ I said, ‘we’re here to-day and gone
to-morrow.’ But not gone this way, most of us—or so I devoutly hope. Stabbed
to the heart with a narrow instrument, that’s right, isn’t it? And depend upon it,
that’s a stiletto, that’s what I said! One of those nasty, murdering Eyetalian
stilettos. Wops they call them in New York—the Eyetalians, I mean, not the
stilettos. And you mark my words, you’ll find out that whoever murdered the
Admiral had been in Italy. Naturally it couldn’t have been an Eyetalian—he’d
have been noticed. Used to sell ice cream, they did, in my young day. But now
they have Walls and those others and much more wholesome stuff, I dare say.
No—we don’t have many foreigners in Whynmouth—except of course
Americans—and they’re not really what you’d call foreigners—just a kind of
queer English, that’s how I look upon them! And the stories those boatmen tell
them—why you’d think they’d be afraid of a judgment—and the poor innocents
lapping it up—but there, I’m getting away from the subject. And a sad subject it
is.” She shook her head, but with no overdone air of melancholy. “Not that you
can say the Admiral was one of us yet. Why, he’d only passed through
Whynmouth half a dozen times. Barely knew him by sight, we did. And his
niece! A most peculiar young lady, if you ask me, Mr. Rudge! Very odd things
I’ve heard about her. Her young gentleman’s actually stopping in the house now.
Came down last evening by the 8.30. And if you ask me, I say ‘No.’”
“Eh!” said Rudge, completely bewildered by this sudden dramatic stop
interrupting the flow of speech.
“I say ‘No,’” repeated Mrs. Davis, nodding her head very violently.
“No to what?” asked the Inspector, still puzzled.
“I say, if you ask me if he’s the murderer, I say ‘No!’”
“Oh! I see, but I never suggested anything of the kind.”
“Not in words, but it’s what it comes to. Cut the cackle and come to the
horses, as Mr. Davis used to say. I’m never one for beating about the bush.”
“What I was going to ask you was—”
Mrs. Davis interrupted serenely.
“I know, I know, Mr. Rudge. Whether Mr. Holland went out or not last night,
I cannot tell you. Bit of a rush we had with the charabancs, and you can’t notice
everything. What I mean to say is, you can’t be in two places at once. And what

with the gas being poor and one thing and another, I’m putting in the electricity
this year. Old-world is old-world, but some things people won’t stand. Hot water
system last year and electricity this. But there, I’m wandering off the point again.
I was just going to say—what was I going to say?”
The Inspector assured her that he had no idea.
“Admiral Penistone was a friend of Sir Wilfrid Denny, was he not?” he asked.
“Now there’s a nice gentleman for you—Sir Wilfrid Denny. Always a cheery
word and a joke. A shame he should be so hard up, poor gentleman. Oh! yes, he
and the Admiral were acquainted. They do say that’s why the Admiral came
down here to live. But I don’t know about that. There’s those who say that Sir
Wilfrid was none too pleased when he heard his friend was coming down here to
live. But there, people will say anything, won’t they? I’m never one to say a
word myself. Too much harm done by gossiping. Keep a still tongue in your
head and you can’t go far wrong. That’s my motto. And one thing I will say is a
wicked shame. To take the Vicar’s boat to do their dirty work in. Trying to drag
him into it, poor gentleman. As if he hadn’t had trouble enough in his life.”
“Had a bit of trouble, has he?”
“Well, it’s a long time ago now. Six and four the little boys were, and how she
could do it! Depend upon it, a woman who leaves her husband and her children
—well, there’s not much to be said for her—not when it’s a good Christian
husband like the Vicar. (There’s some I could name as deserve to be left.)
Leaving her little children, that’s what I can’t get over. And a pretty gentle lady
too, by all accounts. I never saw her myself. It happened before Mr. Mount came
here. And who it was she went off with, I’ve forgotten. But a very handsome
gentleman, I’ve always heard. Those handsome ones have a way with them,
there’s no denying it. Well, well, I wonder what’s become of her? Dear, dear,
life’s a sad mix-up. And if I haven’t gone right away from the subject again!
Talking about Mr. Holland we were—and he’s a handsome fellow if you like.
And yet they say Miss Fitzgerald doesn’t seem to think so, for all they’re
engaged to be married.”
“So that’s what they say?”
Mrs. Davis nodded very significantly.
“And what the Admiral wanted to see Mr. Holland about, I’ve no idea,” she
went on. “But it’s crossed my mind that maybe the young lady wanted the
engagement off, and sent her uncle to do the dirty work for her. Though why it
couldn’t have waited till the morning … I dare say that’s exactly what the
Admiral thought, and why he changed his mind and said he had a train to catch.”
Inspector Rudge made a valiant effort and interpreted this cryptic
pronouncement.

“Do you mean,” he said, “that Admiral Penistone called here last night?”
“Why, of course he did. Asked the Boots for Mr. Holland. And then, just as
the man was going off, called him back again, hemmed and hawed and looked at
his watch, and said he had a train to catch, there wouldn’t be time for him to see
Mr. Holland.”
“What time was this?”
“I couldn’t say exactly. It was after eleven o’clock. I was in bed, and glad to
be there. Such a day as we’d had. Really, these charabancs—they do take it out
of one! There were a lot of people about still. These warm nights you can’t get
the people to bed.”
“A train to catch,” mused the Inspector.
“That would be the 11.25 I expect,” said Mrs. Davis. “The up train for
London. Six in the morning it gets there. But he didn’t go by it. What I mean is,
he couldn’t have gone by it, because if he had, he wouldn’t have been lying
murdered in the Vicar’s boat.”
And she looked at Inspector Rudge triumphantly.

CHAPTER V
By John Rhode
INSPECTOR RUDGE BEGINS TO FORM A THEORY
assumed an expression of profound admiration. “My word,
Mrs. Davis, it takes a woman like you to put two and two together like that!” he
exclaimed. “Of course the Admiral could not have caught the train, now I come
to think of it!”
Mrs. Davis chuckled good-humouredly. “There, now you’re laughing at me,”
she said. “I don’t know how it is, but most of my visitors always seem to find a
joke in something or other I say to them. Perhaps it’s just as well, it keeps them
cheerful and contented, and what I always say is: make your visitors happy as
long as you’re sure they have got enough money to pay their bills. Not that they
often manage to hoodwink me—”
“I’m sure they don’t,” interrupted the Inspector politely. “It would take a
clever man to do that, I’m certain. By the way, how was it you knew all about
the murder of Admiral Penistone before I got here?”
“It isn’t always those that get about the most that hears the most,” replied Mrs.
Davis roguishly. “Here am I, not been outside the house this blessed morning,
and I warrant I know more about it than anybody else in Whynmouth, barring
the police, of course, Inspector. You see, it’s this way: you came in by the hotel
entrance, and you wouldn’t have noticed it. But if you go up the side street
there’s another door that leads into the Shades. It’s put there, apart from the
house, so that it won’t interfere with the hotel visitors. They get their drinks in
the smoking-room, and pay more for them, too. It’s the outside customers that
use the Shades, fishermen and the like of that, such as the gentlemen who use the
smoking-room wouldn’t care to associate with. Not that there’s anything amiss
with them, bar that they’re a bit free with their language sometimes. They’re
polite enough to me when I go in there in the mornings at opening time to see
that all’s right and comfortable.”
“Ah, so you heard about the murder in the Shades this morning, did you, Mrs.
Davis?” suggested the Inspector.
“Why! that’s just what I was going to tell you about!” exclaimed Mrs. Davis,
in a slightly hurt tone. “But you gentlemen in the police are all the same. You’re
so short with your questions that a body can hardly get a word in edgeways. As I
INSPECTOR RUDGE

was going to say, I was in there this morning when Billy the barman was taking
down the shutters, and as soon as he unlocked the door in walked a couple of
chaps with ambulance badges on. I asked them if there had been an accident, and
they told me how Mr. Ware of Lingham had found the Admiral’s body in the
Vicar’s boat, which was floating about, with no one in sight.”
At this moment, as though in answer to Inspector Rudge’s inward prayer, an
agitated-looking cook appeared from the back regions and muttered something
in Mrs. Davis’s ear. “Why, there now! if it hadn’t altogether slipped my
memory,” she exclaimed. “I’ve been so interested hearing you talk, Inspector,
that I’ve never ordered the joint for lunch. You’ll excuse me if I run off and see
to it, won’t you, Mr. Rudge?”
The Inspector waited till Mrs. Davis had disappeared, then, when he was
satisfied that she was out of hearing, rang a bell marked “Porter.” In a few
minutes a bald-headed individual hustled into the entrance hall, still struggling
with the short jacket which he had hastily thrust on over his rolled-up shirt
sleeves. From his appearance he seemed to have been interrupted in the act of
stoking the central heating system. He looked at Inspector Rudge enquiringly.
“Yessir,” he remarked.
“I’m Inspector Rudge, and I came here to make certain enquiries. You knew
Admiral Penistone, I believe?”
The man scratched his head. “Well, sir, I can’t rightly say as I knew him,” he
replied. “I’ve only seen him once in my life, and that was last night. Came in
here, he did, and asked for Mr. Holland.”
The Inspector nodded. “So I believe. Now, I’m particularly anxious to know
how he was looking then. Did he seem worried, or anxious, or anything like
that?”
“I couldn’t very well say, sir. You see, it was gone eleven, and I was just
going to shut up the house. Mrs. Davis is always telling me to be careful of the
gas, and there was only one light burning. The Admiral came just inside the
door, and stood where you might be standing now, sir. ‘Is Mr. Holland in?’ he
asks, sharp like. And almost before I had time to say he was in bed, he said that
it didn’t matter and that he couldn’t wait, as he had a train to catch. He wasn’t
here no more than a few seconds, sir. He seemed in a hurry, but I couldn’t
properly see his face. I wouldn’t have known who it was if he hadn’t told me.”
Again the Inspector nodded. “You’d recognise him again if you saw him, I
suppose?” he asked.
“Well, sir, I might and I mightn’t. I never got a proper sight of him, as you
might say.”
“Oh, well, it doesn’t matter,” said the Inspector carelessly. “Was Mr. Holland

in when Admiral Penistone called?”
“I’m pretty sure he was, sir, leastways, his boots was outside his door. I saw
them when I went up to bed soon after. And he didn’t come in later, I know that
for a fact.”
“How can you be sure of that?”
“Why, sir, because I locked the door as I always do round about half-past
eleven. If anybody wants to get in after that, they presses the bell, which rings in
my room, and I comes down and lets them in. And the bell didn’t ring last night,
sir.”
“I see. And when is the door opened again?”
“I unbolts it first thing, when I comes down in the morning, sir, round about
six, that is.”
“What do you do after you unlock the door?”
“Why, sir, I lights the kitchen fire and puts on the kettle for a cup of tea.”
“Did you happen to see Mr. Holland this morning?”
“I was in the hall when he went out after breakfast, sir. About nine o’clock
that would have been. And he hasn’t come back since, at least not that I know
of.”
The sound of Mrs. Davis’s voice, rapidly growing in intensity as she returned
from the back regions, caused Rudge to beat a hasty retreat. He slipped out of
the hotel, and began to walk towards the police station, reviewing the scraps of
information which he had picked up at the Lord Marshall, and congratulating
himself upon having had the idea of interviewing Mrs. Davis. Gossip though she
might be, her freely-expressed opinions of people were based upon a certain
native shrewdness. The Inspector felt that he had already gained a valuable sidelight upon Sir Wilfrid Denny, and that even the revelation of that curious episode
in the Vicar’s past might prove instructive. As to Holland, Mrs. Davis’s
conviction that he was not the murderer was certainly well-grounded if he had
spent the night in the hotel.
But of course, the most interesting thing he had learnt was the alleged visit of
Admiral Penistone shortly after eleven last night. Unfortunately it was
impossible to decide whether the caller had been the Admiral or not. The
porter’s identification of him was obviously worthless. He did not know the
Admiral by sight, he could not even undertake to recognise the caller again.
Where, in fact, had been the Admiral? He had last been seen shortly after ten, by
the boat-house. That would have given him an hour to get to Whynmouth.
Hardly time to have walked the distance, and yet he was hardly likely to have
taken the car out. Had he done so, somebody would have been sure to have
heard him. Could he have come down in his boat? Possibly, if the tide had been

flowing the right way.
Inspector Rudge frowned. He was no seaman, and he had begun to regard the
vagaries of this infernal River Whyn as a personal affront to him. His idea of a
self-respecting river was a placid stream which knew its own mind and flowed
always in the same direction, like, say, the Thames at Maidenhead. But the
Whyn was mad, subject, like a lunatic, to the influence of the moon, and
changing the direction of its flow in obedience to some law which was past the
Inspector’s comprehension. He decided that he would have to consult some
expert on that point. For the present, he imagined that if the tide had been
flowing down the river, there was no reason why the Admiral should not have
called at the Lord Marshall at the time stated.
But on the other hand, his behaviour there had been quite contrary to what the
Inspector had gathered of his character. He seemed to have been of a peremptory
and determined nature. Rudge could not have imagined him walking into the
place, with the intention of seeing Holland, and then suddenly changing his mind
on the score that he had barely time to catch his train. It would have been more
like him to have stamped about the hall till Holland had been dragged from his
bed.
Unless—yes—that was a possibility. Suppose his visit to the hotel had been
merely to assure himself that Holland had arrived? From the fact that the porter
had offered to go and see if he was in, he would have known that he was staying
in the house. Perhaps, having ascertained this, his object had been accomplished,
and the excuse about the train had been trumped up on the spur of the moment,
to account for his exit. He might not have wanted to see Holland just then.
On the other hand, if the visitor had not been the Admiral, why had he given
his name? To make it appear that the Admiral had been in Whynmouth at that
particular time? This opened up a wide field for speculation, in which one
central fact was apparent. The visitor must have known something of Admiral
Penistone’s movements that evening. And therefore every effort must be made to
trace him.
And what about Holland himself? The Inspector was not at all satisfied on the
subject of that impulsive gentleman. Mrs. Davis may have been right in her
conjecture that Miss Fitzgerald was not eager to marry him, but he was by no
means certain that she was equally right in her opinion that he was not the
murderer. There was no means of verifying his statement that he had spent the
night in the hotel. He could easily have slipped out during the confusion that
appeared to have reigned before eleven, and returned just after six in the
morning, when the door was unlocked and the porter was busy with the kitchen
fire. Had he done so, and met the Admiral in Whynmouth or elsewhere? The

more he considered the matter, the wider the field of speculation seemed to
extend before Rudge’s vision.
His original intention had been to drive out and see Sir Wilfrid Denny at West
End, after he had finished with Mrs. Davis. But the possible light which that
loquacious lady had thrown upon the Admiral’s movements decided him to defer
the visit. He had formed the rudiments of a theory as to the time and place of the
murder, but the possibility of this theory depended upon the tides in the River
Whyn, and upon this subject he must seek expert advice. Why not have another
chat with Neddy Ware? He knew the tides as no one else did, his hobby had
rendered a study of them absolutely necessary to him. And besides, there was
always the chance that he might have observed some detail which he had not
recollected in the first excitement of his discovery.
Inspector Rudge turned his car towards Lingham once more, and very soon
reached Ware’s cottage. The old man was at home, smoking his pipe
contemplatively after his midday meal. He greeted the Inspector hospitably, and
the two sat down in a room decorated with models of ships and faded
photographs of the vessels in which Ware had served.
“You want to know about the tides in the river?” he replied, in answer to the
Inspector’s explanation of the cause of his visit. “Why, they’re simple enough,
so long as you remember that it’s high water, Full and Change, at Whynmouth at
seven o’clock.”
Rudge laughed. “I haven’t a doubt it’s simple enough to you,” he said.
“Personally, I haven’t the foggiest idea what you’re talking about. What on earth
do you mean by high water, Full and Change?”
“Why, merely that it’s high water at Whynmouth at seven o’clock nearabouts,
on the days when the moon is full or new,” replied Ware. “Now, take this
morning’s tide, for instance. To-day’s Wednesday, the 10th. It was new moon on
Monday, that’s to say it was high water at Whynmouth at seven on Monday
evening. It would be about eight yesterday evening and half-past this morning.
You can allow six hours between high and low water, making it low water at
half-past two this morning. The tide up here begins to flow half to three-quarters
of an hour after low water at Whynmouth, or say soon after three. And that’s
when I went out fishing.”
“After three!” exclaimed Rudge. “But I thought you said the church clock
struck four not long before you saw the boat?”
“The clock!” replied Ware, in a voice of supreme contempt. “You don’t
expect the tide to fall in with the children’s games you play with the clock in
summer, do you? You play a game of make-believe with the time, just because
you haven’t the courage to face the prospects of getting up an hour earlier than

usual. It may be all very well for landsmen, but it won’t do for sailors. To them,
time’s time, and you can’t alter it.”
“I see. Then, by summer-time the tide began to flow this morning up here,
soon after four. From what you tell me, then, I gather that it began to ebb about
ten last night?”
“That’s right, ten or a little before,” agreed Ware. “As I say, the moon was
new two days ago, which means that it was pretty well the top of the springs last
night. I reckon the ebb must have run down the river nigh on three knots for the
first couple of hours or so. After that it would have slacked off a bit, as it always
does.”
“So that a man leaving here between ten and eleven would have had no
difficulty in getting to Whynmouth by boat?” suggested Inspector Rudge.
“He’d have drifted there and likely enough gone straight out to sea,” replied
Ware. “That is, if he didn’t use his oars. If he did, he could have got to
Whynmouth in under the hour, easy.”
The old sailor had glanced shrewdly at the Inspector as he spoke. Rudge saw
what was in his mind, and smiled. “You can guess what I’m getting at,” he said.
“I thought it possible that Admiral Penistone might have taken his boat down to
Whynmouth last night. But if he did, the boat cannot have come back by itself.
Somebody must have rowed it back and put it into the boat-house.”
He paused, half expecting some comment from Ware, but the old man merely
nodded, and continued puffing at his pipe in silence. Rudge tried a new tack.
“Why was the painter of the Vicar’s boat cut, and not untied, Ware?” he asked
abruptly.
Ware smiled. “Because it couldn’t have been anything else, as the Vicar’s
boys could tell you, if you asked them,” he replied. “It’s no business of mine,
this murder, but naturally my mind’s been on it all the morning.”
“I’d very much like to hear the conclusions you’ve come to,” said Inspector
Rudge quietly. “Why do you say that the painter of the Vicar’s boat couldn’t
have been untied, for instance?”
“I haven’t come to any conclusions,” replied Ware impassively. “That is, I
don’t know who killed the Admiral, if that’s what you mean. But it isn’t difficult
to understand how the boats came to be found as they were.”
“Not for you, perhaps,” remarked the Inspector, “but it would be a great help
to me if you’d explain.”
“Aye, that I will. Now take the Vicar’s boat first. She’s not kept in the boathouse while the boys are at home, but out in the stream, tied to a post.
Sometimes the lads remember to take the oars and crutches out of her when they
come ashore, mostly they don’t. I’ve seen them left in her dozens of times.

“Now, suppose they’d been out in her yesterday evening, and tied her up
when the tide was high, or well up, as it would have been any time between
seven and ten. You’ll find, in any tidal river, that the greater part of the rise
happens during the first three hours of the flood, and the greater part of the fall
during the first three hours of the ebb. Right. They come in when the tide’s well
up, and what do they do? One of them stands up in the bow, and makes the
painter fast to the post. They’re both well-grown lads, and they’d naturally make
fast about four or five feet above the water. Then they’d pole the stern round, till
it touched the bank and they could jump ashore. Maybe they were afraid of
being late for dinner, and forgot the oars and crutches in their hurry.”
Inspector Rudge nodded. This did not seem to take him any further than he
had got already.
“Now, take the Admiral’s boat,” continued Ware. “From what I hear, she was
seen either in, or alongside, the Rundel Croft boat-house soon after ten. Now this
I’m pretty sure of. If anybody took her out between ten and one this morning,
they didn’t row far up the river. You don’t make much headway with a heavy
boat like that against a three-knot tide. You take it from me, if she went out at
all, she went down-stream, and not up.
“After one this morning—I’m talking in shore time now, not real time—things
would be different. There’d be only a gentle stream running down till four,
perhaps a knot at the most. Anyone could row against that; it wouldn’t take them
more than a couple of hours to come up from Whynmouth, say, taking it easy.
That’s clear enough, isn’t it?”
“Perfectly clear,” replied Rudge. “It comes to this. If the Admiral was
murdered in his own boat, it must have been somewhere below Rundel Croft,
anywhere as far down as Whynmouth, in fact?”
“That’s right. Now I suppose whoever murdered him brought the boat back
with the body in it. Suppose they got back round about slack water. The chap,
whoever he was, sees the Vicar’s boat moored to the post in the stream, and hits
upon the idea of putting the body in it. He goes alongside, lifts the body in, and
then what does he do next? How is he going to cast off the Vicar’s boat? Tell me
that?”
“I don’t exactly see the difficulty,” replied the Inspector. “It wasn’t made fast
with a chain and padlock.”
“You didn’t see what I was getting at just now,” said Ware, with a touch of
impatience. “Why, when he got back, it was dead low water, and the river had
fallen three or four feet since the boat had been made fast. Don’t you see? Unless
he was a very tall man, he wouldn’t be able to reach the knot unless he swarmed
up the post. There was only one thing for him to do, and that was to cut the

painter. And there’s one thing about that you may not have noticed. That painter
is a nearly new piece of inch-and-a-half manilla.”
“I noticed that it looked fairly new. But I can’t see for the moment what that’s
got to do with it.”
“Ever tried to cut new manilla with an ordinary pocket knife? No, I suppose
not. But you can take it from me that you’d find it a pretty tough job. And when
you’d finished you’d have left a frayed edge. But this rope was cut clean
through, like as though it had been cut with one stroke of a very sharp knife.
Anyway, cut it was, and the boat left to drift.”
Ware tapped out his pipe, and began slowly to refill it. He drew from his
pocket the end of a cake of tobacco, which he shaved carefully into the palm of
his hand. “This knife is pretty sharp,” he remarked. “I keep it so on purpose to
cut up my baccy. But I wouldn’t reckon to cut through that painter with it at one
stroke. No, it was a sharper and stronger knife than this that did the job, I’ll be
bound.”
While he proceeded to fill and light his pipe, Inspector Rudge’s thoughts were
busy. The possibility that Admiral Penistone had taken his boat out again and
rowed down the river seemed to be greatly strengthened. In that case, he had
probably been murdered somewhere near Whynmouth, and his body had reached
the spot where it was found much as Ware had supposed. But was there any way
of verifying this?
In the first place, what time had he started? The doctor had given it as his
opinion that he had been killed before midnight. Again, if he had indeed been the
visitor to the Lord Marshall, he had reached Whynmouth soon after eleven. His
departure from Rundel Croft could not have been very long deferred; his
impatience to leave the Vicarage seemed to point to a desire to start as soon as
possible. His excuse to his niece for not going up to the house with her, that he
wished to smoke a cigar before going in, was probably mainly to get her out of
the way. He had probably intended to start as soon as she was out of sight and
hearing.
But if he had done so, how was it that the Vicar, who was in the summerhouse till twenty minutes past ten, had not seen him? Suddenly Rudge
remembered the Vicar’s evident confusion when he had heard of the murder.
Was it possible that he had actually seen the Admiral’s departure on this
mysterious journey, and had his own very good reasons for not disclosing the
fact? It was at least possible.
The Inspector’s reflections were interrupted by a remark from Ware, who had
at last succeeded in getting his pipe to draw satisfactorily. “Queer thing that I
don’t seem to recognise Admiral Penistone,” he said. “There was only one of

that name in the Navy List when I was serving, and I saw him more than once.”
“Did you? When was that?” asked Rudge eagerly.
“Why, on the China Station, twenty years ago and more. I was in the
Rutlandshire then, one of the three-funnelled County class cruisers, she was, and
the very devil to roll in a seaway. I remember once being caught in the edge of a
typhoon, and she pretty nigh carried everything away, alow and aloft. That’s her,
over there.”
He pointed with the stem of his pipe to one of the photographs that adorned
the room. “Her sister ship was on the same station with us. Huntingdonshire, she
was called, and you couldn’t tell t’other from which, except by the bands on
their funnels. Our six-inch guns for’ard was a bit higher above the deck, that was
all. Huntingdonshire’s skipper was a man called Penistone, and a better officer
you couldn’t meet. The Huntingdonshires swore by him. She was always a
happy ship, all on board properly looked after. And smart too. Captain Penistone
had been a gunnery expert before he was promoted, and he kept it up on his own
ship. When he commanded her, Huntingdonshire had the best gunnery record in
the Navy.”
“Was this the same man whose body you saw in the Vicar’s boat this
morning?” asked Rudge.
“Well, if it was, he’s changed a lot since I knew him. Not that the body I saw
wasn’t about the same height, and all that. But, if it was the same face, it has
changed a lot in the last twenty years. It was the expression I go by mostly. The
Captain Penistone I knew was a jovial sort of chap, with a cheery word for
everybody, no matter whether he was just a stoker or the Admiral himself. And
the chap I saw this morning, looked, with all due respect to him, an ill-tempered
sort of devil.”
“I fancy he was, from what I’ve heard of him,” replied Rudge. “Well, Ware,
I’m much obliged to you for what you’ve told me. By the way, you’ll have to
give evidence at the inquest, you know. You’ll get a summons to attend in due
course. And I’ll drop in for another yarn sometime, if I may?”
“Aye, you’re always welcome,” said Ware cordially. “And if you’re a
fisherman, I’ll take you to a spot where there’s some fine sport to be had. It’s
private by rights, like all the fishing here, but no one minds about me.”
Inspector Rudge left the old man’s cottage, and started up his car. It was time
to pay his deferred visit to Sir Wilfrid Denny. As he drove towards West End,
his thoughts were busy with the problem of how to discover whether or not
Admiral Penistone had rowed down-stream the previous night. If he had he was
not likely to have been observed. The river ran out of sight of the road for the
greater part of its course. Only at one point, Fernton Bridge, was it visible. There

were certainly a few cottages close to its banks, but their inhabitants were pretty
certain to have been in bed by ten o’clock. There was, therefore, only the faint
possibility that someone had crossed Fernton Bridge at the moment that the
Admiral had passed beneath it.
The fact that his journey was not likely to have been observed had another
bearing on the matter. His murderer must either have known of his intention, or
must have seen him by chance, either at Fernton Bridge or in Whynmouth. But if
he had met him by chance, how did he happen to be provided with a suitable
weapon? People didn’t as a rule carry about with them daggers capable of
inflicting such a wound. No, the casual meeting did not seem to fit in, somehow.
The crime must have been premeditated. But until he could learn more of the
Admiral’s associates it was impossible to guess who could have known of his
plans. There was always the likelihood, of course, that the murderer had
arranged the rendezvous.
As he crossed Fernton Bridge, Rudge stopped the car and looked over the
parapet on either side. He found that he could see a few hundred yards, both upand down-stream, before bends hid the river in either direction. On a clear night
a boat would show up against the water for some distance. Having satisfied
himself of this he continued his journey.
West End was a suburb of Whynmouth on the harbour side of the river, and
consisted mainly of red-brick villas, each standing in its square of garden. But
one older stone-built house remained hidden from its neighbours and the railway
to the north by a high shrubbery. This, as Rudge had ascertained, was called
Mardale, and was the residence of Sir Wilfrid Denny. The drive gate was open,
and he drove in, to be struck at once by the neglected and overgrown appearance
of the lawn that sloped down to the river, and the state of dilapidation into which
the house had been allowed to fall. He remembered Mrs. Davis’s hint as to Sir
Wilfrid’s lack of means, which had apparently been fully justified.
There seemed to be nobody about as he rang the bell, but, after a long wait, an
elderly and rather forbidding-looking dame appeared, and looked enquiringly at
him.
“Is Sir Wilfrid Denny at home?” he asked.
“No, he ain’t,” replied the woman. “ ’E was called to London hunexpectedly,
and left by the first train this morning.”

CHAPTER VI
By Milward Kennedy
INSPECTOR RUDGE THINKS BETTER OF IT
question or two elicited the facts that the “call” had been a telephonic
one, and that it was not Sir Wilfrid’s habit to go often or regularly or, above all,
early to London. He was not, it seemed, a city magnate, but a retired civil
servant—“one of those conciliar officers,” the woman explained. The Inspector
began to understand the untidiness of the drive; for whilst your Business Man
usually acquires his knighthood at the height of his prosperity and retires to
affluence, your civil servant finds that a title is small compensation for the
difference between salary and pension.
The news of Sir Wilfrid’s absence was disconcerting, but on the whole, and
after a couple of seconds of quick thinking, not altogether unwelcome. Inspector
Rudge was subconsciously aware that his enquiries were becoming unduly
dispersed and that none of them by itself had so far earned the description of
“thorough.” As he thanked the woman, gave her a polite message for Sir Wilfrid
asking him to get in touch with the police on his return, started up the car and
drove back towards Lingham, his subconscious feelings took definite shape in
his conscience, so definite that just before he reached the fork of the road he
pulled in close to the hedge, stopped the car, lit his pipe, took out his notebook,
and meditated.
He had been dashing about to and fro—from the Vicarage to Rundel Croft,
from Rundel Croft to Whynmouth, from the Lord Marshall Hotel to Ware’s
cottage, from the cottage back to West End, and now he was going—well, where
was he going now? Of course, he had wasted very little time, for the distances
were all of them small; incidentally he wondered whether a little while ago he
had been quite safe to assume that the Admiral could hardly have reached the
Lord Marshall on foot by eleven o’clock, for now that he came to consider it the
distance from Rundel Croft could not be much over two and a half miles at the
outside. However, that was by the way; what the Inspector wanted at the
moment was to plan out his campaign.
What had he learnt, in the first place, at Rundel Croft? By Jove, he had
forgotten all about that newspaper. If Emery had discovered the “regular” copy
still in the hall, might not the explanation of the copy in the dead man’s pocket
A TACTFUL

be that he had indeed gone into Whynmouth? Well, it was idle to speculate;
there, obviously, was one loose thread to be picked up. For the rest, his enquiries
had been directed to two distinct purposes—to find out something about the
people involved, their history and characteristics and so on, and on the other
hand, to discover what had happened after the dinner at the Vicarage on the
previous evening. The more he considered it, the more annoyed he felt at Miss
Fitzgerald’s flight—he hoped to goodness that was too strong a word; and he
wondered, doubtfully, whether he had not been a bit too generous in the liberty
he had allowed to Holland. Still, neither of them, perhaps—unless his
impressions were all wrong—was the best source for information about the
Admiral. But what else had he to go upon? Practically nothing but the gossip of
the Vicarage, the servants, old Ware and Mrs. Davis, none of whom could boast
more than a month’s acquaintance with the dead man. The Vicar had suggested
that the Admiral usually was genial enough; his sons had implied rather the
opposite. And old Ware—well, what reliance could be placed on his opinion? A
petty officer could hardly have been intimate with the captain of a cruiser; and
besides, twenty years was long enough to dim the vividness of his recollection.
Of course, Sir Wilfrid Denny might have been able to help, but it was rather a
leap in the dark. He might have known the Admiral no longer than had the
Vicar; and if he had seen more of him in the past month it might simply be that
the ex-gunnery expert had no particular penchant for clergymen; that would not
be an unprecedented trait in a retired Admiral.
No, Rudge told himself, he must clearly get to work on less haphazard lines;
there would be records at the Admiralty, there were the solicitors, there would be
“references” given to the house-agents when the lease of Rundel Croft was
signed. And the thought of the solicitors reminded him of the will. He had not
finished his study of it; its provisions might be of first-rate importance, as a
guide to motive. He did not even know whether it was a copy of a proved will,
though that obviously would make a vital difference.
There seemed to be plenty of enquiries to set on foot, and the first essentials
seemed to be a telephone and a staff; it was not much use leaving both the
sergeant and the constable to spend their day at the boat-house while he himself
tried to be everywhere at once and to do three jobs at the same time. Still, he
would not be in too much of a hurry; he was enjoying his pipe and he wanted to
look all round the problem. What about last night’s events? By Jove, there was a
point which he seemed to have missed. Where was the key of the french
window? Was the Admiral the only one who had a private key, or did his niece
possess one also?
Rudge puffed away at his pipe and flicked over the pages of his notebook. The

maid—yes, Jennie Merton: nice little thing, and quite intelligent. She had given
him a pretty clear picture of Elma Fitzgerald and her uncle and the household as
a whole. Had she, though? Had he not been a shade too ready to take her opinion
as reliable? She had been there just three weeks; and yet when she had told him
that Elma and the Admiral were “sharp” with one another, and that Elma and
Holland did not “hold hands” much and that she could not understand the whys
and wherefores of Elma’s variability in getting herself up and putting on her best
clothes—well, had not he been a bit too ready to think that there was something
mysterious, almost sinister, in all of this? More likely the other maid, the one
who had been so bored that she had left after a week of Rundel Croft, could have
told him the inner history of the Admiral’s household: perhaps they were used to
a gayer life. … Anyhow, she must have been pretty thoroughly bored if she had
chucked her wages in order to get away. He pulled himself up sharply; here he
was, on the brink of labelling the vanished maid as a foreign adventuress—and
all on the strength of a few words of Jennie Merton’s.
And when he came to think about it, there was something, well, a little
confusing about Jennie’s account of the morning, and the disappearance of that
white evening dress. Emery, apparently, had found Jennie, and Jennie had gone
to wake up her mistress and to tell her she was wanted (the whole process taking
no less than ten minutes). Then Jennie was told to clear out at once, as her
mistress wished to get up. But at some stage she was told to pack a few things
for the night. And when she started on the packing—and that, presumably, was
while her mistress was being interviewed downstairs—the white frock had
vanished and was nowhere to be found. Yet Jennie blandly assumed that the
frock was afterwards packed in the bag by her mistress, as if that explained
everything. It certainly seemed to suggest that her wits were not so wonderfully
sharp after all. And what was more, he would have another word or two with her
on the subject.
There was certainly a good job of work to be done at Rundel Croft. That was
not to say there was nothing to do at the Vicarage. If the two boys had found no
trace of the weapon, a proper search might need to be organised. And then the
Vicar’s hat: on the one hand he had been so quick to remember where he had
absent-mindedly left it, which seemed a bit inconsistent; and on the other he had
shown no perturbation when the subject was mentioned—at any rate infinitely
less than at other points in the interview.
Inspector Rudge knocked out his pipe and started up the car. He was for
Rundel Croft, and as he turned into the drive he found yet another reason for his
decision—the traces in the boat and boat-house. He left the car in front of the
house and hurried round and down in search of his two subordinates. They

greeted him in a manner which suggested that they were bursting with news.
“Well, Sergeant?” he asked. “Anything important? Found the weapon?”
“No, sir, but—”
“What, then? The footprints?”
“Er—no, sir.”
“H’m. Well, we’ll hear about it in a minute.”
Then he realised that he was being rather needlessly abrupt and that Sergeant
Appleton in particular was now wearing a distinctly sullen expression.
“Sorry,” he said with a pleasant smile. “The point is that we’ve a lot to get
through and I want to get started at once on the jobs that are going to take the
most time. Just set the wheels moving, you know. So if you haven’t actually
caught the murderer, or as good as done so—”
“Not quite that, sir,” the sergeant answered, his good humour restored.
“Then you, Sergeant, come up to the house with me. Hempstead, you’ll stay
on here. We’ll be down again as soon as we can. Keep an eye on the opposite
bank too.”
The two men hurried back to the house, and the Inspector led the way straight
to the french window which was foremost in his thoughts; one thing was certain,
the key was not on the outside. They hurried round to the front door and rang the
bell; after an interval of at least three minutes, during which the Inspector fumed
impatiently, Emery opened it and admitted them with the same air of
incompetent reluctance which had been the Inspector’s first impression of him.
“I want another word with you, Emery,” he began, sternly.
“Here it is,” said Emery.
“Here what is?” The man really seemed to be half-witted as well as painfully
slow.
“Evening Gazette,” Emery explained, turning and pointing to a side table in
the hall.
“The regular copy? The one which is delivered about nine? Where was it?”
“There.”
“But you told me you weren’t sure. If it was lying there all the time—”
“No more I was,” Emery asserted, in weak indignation, “and the minute I
went to see and my back was turned, you skipped off.”
The Inspector snorted; he was unable to deny that the man had some reason on
his side, but people who were as slow as the butler must expect all kinds of
criticism.
“Had it been read?” was his next question. He saw at once that it was not
calculated to produce a helpful answer, so he hastily amended it and extracted
from Emery the opinion that the paper had not been touched since first it had

been laid by him on the table.
The Inspector nodded; then picked up the paper and requested the butler to
lead the way to the study. The sergeant was distinctly puzzled, particularly at the
appropriation of the Evening Gazette, but followed in silence, and closed the
study door behind the little procession.
“Now, Emery,” the Inspector resumed, with difficulty restraining a tendency
to shout, “I want to know about the keys of the french window—the one you
shut but did not bolt. First of all, were all the other doors locked and bolted when
you went to bed last night? They were, eh? So that this was the only way by
which the Admiral and Miss Fitzgerald could get in. I see. And now this window
—how many keys are there?”
“I’ve got my key here on my ring,” the butler replied and quite briskly
produced a fat bunch, selected the key and proffered it for inspection. The other
took it, satisfied himself that it was the right key by unlocking the window, and
handed back the bunch. He had wondered how the butler managed to remember
not to leave the key in the lock inside; the bunch explained it.
“Right,” he said. “How many others are there?”
“Only the one that I know of. The one the Admiral had himself.”
“Sure of that?”
“It’s the only one I ever heard of.”
“Miss Fitzgerald hasn’t got one?”
“No.”
“How d’you know?”
“Well, once or twice of an evening she’s borrowed the key from the Admiral.”
“Oh, does she often go out in the evening?” The Inspector could not resist this
deviation from the main channel of his questions.
“Now and again. With Mr. Holland,” the butler told him, with an approach to
a smirk.
“Walking out, eh?” Rudge suggested vulgarly; and the smirk became an
accomplished fact. Rudge made a mental comparison of this with Jennie
Merton’s opinion; then, as if determined to keep Emery in his place, he asked
sharply: “What’s happened to the second key—the Admiral’s?”
“Well, I—I really couldn’t say.”
“Where did the Admiral keep it? On a ring with other keys like you do, or
separately?”
“By itself,” Emery told him. “It used to lie on his table in the pen tray. It had a
label.”
The Inspector strode sharply across the room.
“Well, it’s not there now,” he announced. Several bright ideas sprang into his

mind. The Admiral must have given the key to his niece when she walked up to
the house ahead of him. She must either have come in and locked the door
behind her—and so locked her uncle out: in which case how did he get the
overcoat? Or else she must have left the window open, probably with the key in
the lock and her uncle must have come in, locking the door and pocketing the
key—but there had been no odd key in his pockets, certainly none with a label.
Sergeant Appleton coughed.
“Maybe this is it, sir,” he said and held out a key to which was attached a
small metal label with the word “Window” engraved on it. He added, in answer
to the Inspector’s rather angry questioning look, “We were going to tell you, sir,
by the boat-house.”
“That’s all for the present,” the Inspector said to Emery. “I may want you
again later, so you’ll keep handy, see? Is there another telephone? Then this is an
extension, I suppose?” (He pointed to one on a table at the far end of the study.)
“Just switch it through to here. And another thing: I shall want to see the maid—
Merton—again in a few minutes.”
“Well, she’s gone out,” the butler told him, with perhaps a tinge of malicious
satisfaction.
“But I told you, didn’t I—” the other began, angrily.
“It’s her mother. She’s queer.”
The Inspector snorted again, and the butler hastily withdrew. It was useless to
find fault with the poor creature; he could no more stop Jennie Merton going out
than Mr. Holland coming in, as Rudge observed to the sergeant.
“No harm done,” he added, in reference to the key; the sergeant rightly took
this to be a veiled apology. “Where did you find it?”
“In the boat—the Admiral’s boat.”
“You haven’t been messing about—”
“Oh no, sir. Not that there’s any danger. Apart from the oars and rowlocks,
she’s as neat as a new pin.”
“H’m. What about the key for finger-prints?”
But it was easy to see that the rough surface of the label would not “take” a
finger-print.
“Someone took trouble with the boat,” said Rudge thoughtfully, “so I wonder
how the key came to be left there.”
“I don’t think the state of the boat means much—necessarily,” the sergeant
suggested. “I had a word with the Vicar’s boys. They say that Admiral Penistone
always gave her a mop over, like, last thing after he’d finished with her for the
day.”
The Inspector considered this. It seemed to fit in with the description of the

Admiral as a precise martinet; and it might help to explain why, after hustling
away from the Vicarage—directly after ten, because he must be in by midnight!
—he had dawdled behind at the boat-house. But it was far from conclusive.
“Well, fire ahead,” he urged the sergeant.
“It just caught my eye, the edge of the label affair. Just sticking out from
under the bottom boards of the boat. As if it had been dropped and had slipped
down inside.”
“We’d better try it, just to make sure.”
He fitted it into the key-hole, and locked and unlocked the window.
“That’s it all right,” he agreed and stood silent for a few moments, tapping the
key against the palm of his left hand and staring absent-mindedly about the
room. Suddenly he emerged from his brown study and walked across to the
mantelpiece. He took down a large, framed photograph of a naval officer in fulldress uniform.
“That’s him all right, isn’t it? Admiral Penistone?”
“Yes,” said Sergeant Appleton in some surprise; he was enlightened about the
conversation with old Ware.
“It doesn’t sound likely to me that he’s not the real Admiral Penistone,” was
his comment. “If he isn’t, he’s pinched the whole outfit,” and he pointed to an
engraved cup which also stood on the mantelpiece. A further scrutiny, moreover,
revealed a “group” of naval officers in the centre of which was a younger but
unmistakably a likeness of the dead man. The names of the group were neatly
printed below the photograph; and in the centre was the name of Captain
Penistone.
“I don’t think there’s more than a shade of doubt,” the Inspector agreed. “But
we can’t afford to take chances. That’s one job I’ve got for you—to ring up the
Admiralty.”
As he spoke, he took down a copy of Who’s Who from a shelf full of reference
books.
“Here we are,” he said. “H’m. No address given, I see—just the outline of his
career in the service. Gunnery, yes. China Squadron. Seems to have been a bit of
a star-turn. Funny that he should have retired so young—I thought the axe was a
modern invention. Anyway you ring up the Admiralty. If he’s the right man,
they can probably tell you a bit more about him, or suggest how we can find out.
Go ahead, Sergeant, get on to the Admiralty.”
Sergeant Appleton took off the receiver. The line was dead; the lamentable
Emery obviously had failed to switch the telephone through. The sergeant set off
to remedy matters, and took the opportunity to give the butler a piece of his
mind.

He returned to find the Inspector seated at the writing-desk, deep in a fresh
attempt to translate legal language into common sense. It was not really as
difficult as he had fancied, on his previous and hurried inspection of the will.
The estate of Admiral Penistone’s brother-in-law apparently was divided equally
(apart from one or two small legacies) between Elma Fitzgerald and her brother.
Until her brother’s death was established, she and her uncle were trustees for his
share, the interest upon which, less a consideration to both of them, was to be put
to the capital; on his death, the money went absolutely to her. As for her share,
she did not receive the principal until she married, and until then her uncle and
Mr. Edwin Dakers, of Dakers and Dakers, were trustees. The only remarkable
clause was a provision that if she married without the written approval of her
uncle, she retained only a life interest in her share, the money on her death going
to a series of charities. The Inspector was rather gratified to find that, as he had
suspected, there was no question of the Admiral having been her sole trustee; his
recollection of the law was that such a situation was hardly possible. The
document of course was a copy; Dakers and Dakers probably would know if it
was a copy of a proved will, and it might be necessary, for formal purposes, to
inspect the original at Somerset House. The sergeant could talk to Mr. Edwin
Dakers. …
But the sergeant did not seem to be getting on with his telephoning, the fact of
the matter being that he was far from certain how exactly one “rang up the
Admiralty” and for whom one asked when one was in touch with that august
department. The local exchange had not been particularly bright either, but was
supposed to be making enquiries. The Inspector frowned, and glanced restlessly
at the Evening Gazette which he had thrown down on the desk. He must have a
careful look through the copy in the dead man’s pocket. The way it was folded
might be suggestive, or there might be a marked paragraph. The Admiral would
surely not have bought an extra one, knowing that his own would be lying in the
hall, unless there had been something of special importance in it. The “news” did
not look anything out of the usual: a “London Flat Tragedy” occupied most of
the front page, together with an account of fresh trouble in Manchuria (Moscow,
as usual, was said to be giving liberal help to the latest unpronounceable War
Lord) and a picture of the bridesmaids at a wedding at St. Margaret’s.
The telephone bell rang. The sergeant, still apprehensive, took up the receiver.
His expression changed rapidly to one of surprise.
“Who? Yes. Hold on and I’ll fetch—oh, very well. Who? Oh, yes, yes, just
wait—” he beckoned frantically to the Inspector, who came quickly across the
room.
“Who is it?”

“Miss—yes—I’m listening—Miss Fitzgerald.”
“Give it to me,” the Inspector demanded. “Come on, man.” The sergeant was
scribbling illegible notes on the pad before him. At length and rather doubtfully
he handed over the instrument. “Miss Fitzgerald? This is Inspector Rudge. I’m
glad you’ve rung up. I want to ask you—”
“Sorry,” he heard in Elma Fitzgerald’s flattest tones, “I can’t wait now. I’ve
sent you a message. And by the way, I’m not Miss Fitzgerald.”
There was a click as she rang off. The Inspector swore, and joggled the lever
furiously up and down.
“Trace that call, please,” he demanded of the exchange, and explained who he
was.
“It’s all right, sir,” said the sergeant. “She was speaking from the Carlton, in
London. She said so herself, and besides I heard the hotel exchange say so when
the call came through.”
“What was the message? Wouldn’t wait to speak to me, eh?”
“She said she understood you wanted to get in touch with her, and with Mr.
Holland. So you’d be interested to know that they were both staying at the
Carlton and would be there for the next day or two, and then they would come
back. She’d be out dancing to-night but would always be glad to see you by
appointment. But would you remember to ask for Mrs. Holland, as she was
married by special license to-day.”
The Inspector digested—or began to digest—this news in silence. If Elma and
Holland were man and wife, it made it difficult to … And then the will. If the
Admiral was dead, the clause about his consent to his niece’s marriage
presumably fell to the ground … Elma’s message certainly gave him something
to think about.
“Well, Sergeant,” he decided, “we’d better get on with it. Hurry up that call to
the Admiralty, and after that I want you to get hold of Mr. Edwin Dakers,” and
he rapidly fired off a series of instructions, including one that he was to be told
when Jennie Merton came back. “I’m going down to the boat-house,” he ended
and departed via the french window.
He found Hempstead patiently on guard.
“Any news?” he asked him.
“No, sir. No one been here.”
“No fresh discoveries?”
“No, sir. The sergeant told you about the key?”
“Yes. Good work. Anything happened opposite?”
“No, sir. The young gentlemen have been looking everywhere for the knife,
but I don’t think they’ve found anything. They said they were going to have a

bathe now.”
The sun was getting hot, and there was a note of envy in the constable’s tones.
“Seen the Vicar?”
“Yes, sir. He’s been watering the garden.”
“What, this morning? In the sun?”
“Yes, sir, with a hose. Worth watching, it was. He watered pretty well
everything in sight—even the flowers now and again. But I shouldn’t say he’s
done them much harm. I reckon he doesn’t know an awful lot about gardening,
and that’s just what Bob Hawkins, who goes in twice a week, says.”
The Inspector surveyed the boat-house and its contents.
“We’ll make casts of those footprints if we can,” he said, “though they don’t
look very distinctive. And I think we’ll take out the oars and rowlocks. We can’t
keep this place under observation for ever and if there are any finger-prints
that’ll tell us anything, we don’t want them mucked up.”
He stepped into the boat and began cautiously to hand out the articles in
question to Hempstead. Whilst he was so doing, the sound of voices on the
opposite bank made him turn, rocking the boat rather perilously. The two boys,
clad in bathing dresses, with towels in their hands, were coming down the rough,
red-brick path from the summer-house. A sudden thought struck the Inspector.
“Hullo!” he called, as they reached the Vicarage landing-steps. “I wonder
whether you’d let me have the loan of your old punt for a while? It would save
me going round by road every time.”
“Rather!” the elder of the two answered.
“If you could bring her across and swim back,” Rudge suggested.
“That’s the idea,” the boy answered with a grin.
By the time the paraphernalia from the boat had been landed safely, the punt
had arrived; the Inspector moored it to a ring in the Rundel Croft landing-stage.
“How many times a day do you bathe?” he asked pleasantly. “Or has the
search made you so hot?”
“It’s all part of the search,” the younger replied, perhaps detecting a note of
criticism in the question.
“We’re going to try diving for the weapon,” the other added.
“Good,” said Rudge, “though I’m afraid that what with the mud and the tide,
and not knowing quite how big the weapon is likely to be, it won’t be easy. I’d
hoped you’d find it on the bank somewhere, but it seems you’ve drawn a blank.”
“All we’ve found is the Admiral’s favourite pipe,” said Peter.
“Indeed! And where did you find that?”
“In father’s study. He must have left it behind last night. He was smoking it
after dinner.”

“Sure it’s his?”
“Oh, yes. You’ll see why when you see it. A dirty old meerschaum shaped
like a nigger’s head.”
“You haven’t got it here, then?” As he asked, he realised that the question was
a foolish one.
“It’s up at the house.” Alec nobly refrained from a sarcastic comment, and
stepped to the end of the punt, preparatory to diving into the river.
“I say, Alec, don’t you think we ought to tell him—?” his brother checked
him.
“Tell him what? Oh, that. You are a fool, Peter. No, it’s got nothing to do with
it.”
“What’s that?” the Inspector enquired.
“Oh, nothing,” was the airy answer. “Something we lost, not something we
found.”
“Better tell me, then,” Rudge suggested. “Police job to find things, you
know.”
“Then you can do the diving instead of us,” Alec suggested, brightly. “Still, as
Peter’s said so much, I’d better tell you. But it’s got nothing to do with your
business. At least, I don’t see why it should have. It’s just that we—or at least
Peter—left a knife in the summer-house yesterday afternoon, or he says he did,
and it’s not there now.”
“Is that so?” Hempstead too pricked up his ears. “What sort of a knife? A
pocket-knife, I suppose.”
“Well, no. It was a large-sized Norwegian knife. We’d used it to point a stake
—you want a sharp knife for that. Anyway, it’s lost; and the chances are that
Peter never left it in the summer-house at all. He’s as bad as father for not
knowing where he’s put things.”
And he plunged into the river, promptly followed by Peter, the Inspector
getting somewhat splashed in consequence. But he was content to get this fresh
news at the cost of a few drops of water, and with a smile on his face he watched
the two lads swim across, scramble out on to the far bank and begin to dive
valorously in search of the unknown weapon.
The smile slowly faded; evidence—or call it information—seemed to be
piling up. He thought of the proverb about the difficulty of seeing the wood for
the trees.
“Interesting, sir, wasn’t it?” Hempstead’s voice broke in on his thoughts.
“Things begin to take shape, as you might say.”
The latter phrase was as much a question as the former.
“Maybe,” the Inspector answered him, slowly, “but there are plenty of puzzles

yet. One thing, Hempstead, is that overcoat. Suppose the Admiral went out in his
boat: well, I grant you he might take an overcoat with him, but it would need to
be a very cold night before you or I’d put on a thick overcoat to row in. Other
things apart, you want your arms free, don’t you?”
The constable produced a throaty noise meant to convey assent without
definitely committing him to it.
“And another thing,” Rudge went on, “is that evening paper. Oh, lots of
puzzles there are about that, as well as the crossword. But the biggest is ‘where
did he get it?’ It must have come by the eight-thirty last night—there’s no
getting away from that.”
There was a pause; and then he added slowly and almost breathlessly, “Unless
it came down by road.”
And then he turned to Hempstead, just sharply enough to catch him
smothering a yawn. He remembered that the unfortunate constable had been on
night duty. That in turn suggested two things to him—first that he must get the
oars and rowlocks up to the station, and that Hempstead could see to that and
have himself “relieved” at the same time; and secondly—
“You didn’t notice anything particular in the way of cars in the
neighbourhood, round about half-past ten, say, last night, did you, Hempstead?”
The constable considered the point.
“Well, now you come to mention it, sir,” he said at length, “there was a car
stopped in Lingham just about a quarter to eleven or thereabouts. I noticed it
stop by the lamp in the Square. Closed car, it was, with a woman in it.”
“Alone?”
“That I couldn’t say. I only know there was a woman because I saw her lean
out of the window and speak to the chauffeur, or whoever was driving.”
“Would you know her again?”
“Can’t say I should, sir. And I didn’t notice the number of the car much, either
—you see there was no occasion, then. I just happened to notice the car. It didn’t
stop above a couple of minutes and then drove on. Along the Whynmouth road.”
“And that, of course,” said Inspector Rudge, “would take it past the
Vicarage.”

CHAPTER VII
By Dorothy L. Sayers
SHOCKS FOR THE INSPECTOR
Inspector ruminated for a few moments upon the fascinating possibilities
suggested by this piece of information, and then, dismissing Hempstead with the
advice to get a good meal and turn in, he walked slowly back towards the house.
“Yes, sonny, what is it?”
This was to Peter Mount, who had suddenly appeared at his elbow.
“A note for you from father,” said the boy. “I came across with it.”
“About the funeral, I expect,” said Rudge to himself. But the note ran:
THE

DEAR INSPECTOR RUDGE,
I am anxious to run up to London this afternoon on an urgent matter
connected with my clerical duties. I hope that there will be no
objection to my doing so. I should not think of absenting myself if the
case were not of great importance, since I know that you would prefer
to have all your witnesses on the spot. However, I trust that I shall not
be detained very long, and I shall, of course, make a point of being
back in time to attend the inquest which, as I am informed by Mr.
Skipworth, will take place the day after to-morrow. I will keep you
informed as to my movements, should you require to get in touch with
me at any time, and should I be detained overnight, shall be staying at
the Charing Cross Hotel.
Apologising for any inconvenience this request may cause you,
Yours very truly,
PHILIP MOUNT.
“Good lord! Another of them,” was the Inspector’s mental comment. He stood
for a few moments undecided, the note open in his hand.
He had to make up his mind. If he forbade the Vicar to go—well, he could
scarcely do that without committing himself to an accusation, for which step he
was certainly not prepared. He could ask the Vicar not to go—but behind the
courtesy of the expression the note seemed to carry a suggestion of mild
determination. He had nothing definite against the Vicar, except that his hat and

his coat had been found in a curious place, and that he was a bad gardener. He
turned to Peter.
“I think I’d like to see your Dad if he can spare a few moments.”
“Right you are.”
“How did you get across, by the way?”
“Your new policeman brought the punt over for me—but he isn’t very good at
it.”
Rudge noted with satisfaction that Hempstead’s deputy had arrived. That
meant that he himself would be free to leave Rundel Croft if he wanted to. He
spoke a word or two to the new arrival—a very stout man called Bancock—
stepped into the punt and was poled across by Peter. On the way up to the
Vicarage he noticed the drenched area round the summer-house. The hose had
caught a clump of begonias at the edge of a garden-bed. One or two of the plants
had been actually broken by the force of the stream, and on others the waterdrops were standing like miniature burning-glasses under the bright sun. The
Vicar would probably wonder, next day, why their foliage should be speckled
with white heat-blisters.
The Vicar was in his study. He greeted Rudge cordially, but his face looked a
little drawn. No doubt he had received a severe shock, thought Rudge. It was a
strong face, though, and handsome in its rather set, ecclesiastical way. It looked
honest, but you could never tell. According to local report the Vicar was a
ritualist, and ritualists had odd ideas about the truth. They would, for instance,
subscribe to the Thirty-nine Articles and then unblushingly invent ingenious
ways to get round them. Rudge was rather well up in the different varieties of
parsons, for his brother-in-law was people’s warden at St. Saviour’s,
Whynmouth.
“Well, Inspector, I hope you haven’t come to tell me that I mustn’t go to
town.”
“Well, no, sir—not exactly. I shouldn’t like to go so far as that, though I don’t
say but what I hadn’t rather you stayed here. Still, as I understand you to say the
business is urgent—”
He paused, to give the Vicar time to explain what the business was, but Mr.
Mount merely said:
“Oh, yes; it is very important. If it would have waited a couple of days I
should have tried to put it off, but I fear that is quite impossible.”
“I see, sir.” Rudge could not for the life of him see what clerical business
could be so urgent as that, unless it was a summons from the Archbishop of
Canterbury or an important conference, and if it were, why should not the Vicar
say so? Mr. Mount’s face displayed, however, only the bland severity of one

about to read the First Lesson.
“I take it that will be all right then, Inspector?”
“Oh, yes, sir. Provided, as you say, you keep in touch with us. And I’m very
much obliged to you for letting me know of your intentions. It isn’t everybody
would be so considerate.”
“We both have our duty to do,” replied the Vicar. “Besides,” he added, with a
slight twinkle, “if I had gone off without letting you know, you might have
imagined I was running away from you, and that would never do.”
Rudge laughed dutifully.
“There’s just one or two things I was going to ask you, sir,” he said, “and I’m
glad to have this opportunity. About the late Admiral Penistone. Should you say
he was a quick walker?”
“No,” said the Vicar. “Admiral Penistone never cared to walk much, owing to
a wound he got in his foot during the War. A piece of shrapnel, I understand. He
was not actually lame, but it tired him to walk very far or very fast. He always
preferred to take the car or go by the river if possible.”
The Inspector nodded. This upset his recent calculations and left him where he
was before. He went on to the next point.
“Do you sleep on the river side of the house, sir?”
“No. My sons and the servants sleep on that side, but my bedroom window is
at the other side, overlooking the lane. Sometimes I get called up in the night to
visit the sick or dying, and it is more convenient for them to be able to knock me
up without disturbing the household. There is a side-door, you see, which opens
on to the lane, with a bell which rings in my bedroom.”
“I see. Does your window command the high road?”
“Yes, in a sense. I mean, I can see the road, but it is, of course, a couple of
hundred yards from the house.”
“Quite so. I suppose you did not happen to see a closed car pass along last
night in the direction of Whynmouth?”
“That is rather a vague question. At what time do you mean?”
“At about a quarter to eleven. I thought perhaps you might have seen it when
you were undressing.”
The Vicar shook his head.
“No,” he said at once, “I am afraid I cannot help you. I came straight upstairs
at ten-twenty, undressed and went to bed. I do not think I looked out of the
window at all. But in any case, at the time you mention, I should be either in the
bathroom along the passage, or” (he twinkled again) “saying my prayers.”
“Just so,” said Rudge, embarrassed as every true Englishman is at the mention
of private devotions. “Well, it was just a chance, sir, but a very slight one. I

couldn’t really have expected you to notice. You’ll be good enough to ring me
up when you get to town, sir?”
“I certainly will,” said the Vicar. “And thank you very much for your
permission to elope. I promise you that I will not break my parole.”
“I’m quite sure of that, sir,” replied Rudge, with conviction, and took his
leave.
He strolled slowly back through the Vicarage garden, his heavy boots
squeaking loudly on the gravel in the hot hush of the August morning. Peter was
still idling about the boat-house. Rudge looked at the post in the stream, with the
end of rope still fastened to it by a couple of half-hitches. He wondered whether
he had assumed too hastily that the body had been dumped into the Vicar’s boat
from another boat. He ought at least to take the precaution of examining the
bank for footprints.
Search, however, revealed nothing very helpful. The grass edge was crumpled
and broken in places, as it would naturally be if the Vicar’s family were
accustomed to board the boat from that point, but the grass itself was too short
and dry to show definite footprints, and anything below high-water mark would
naturally have been obliterated when the tide came up that morning.
Rudge sat down on the bank and stared at the river. The tide was just running
down to the slack, and the ripples went clucking and clapping against the sides
of the punt and the boat-house. On the other side lay the Admiral’s boat,
shivering slightly as the wash of the stream lifted her stern and dimmed the
outlines of her mirrored shape in among the brown shadows. Between bank and
bank the sun blazed full on the water. Rudge found the tune running in his head:
—
“Ol’ man River, dat ol’ man River.
He must know sumfin’, he don’ say nuffin’—”
That reminded him that he had promised to get his landlady Paul Robeson’s
record of “Swing low, sweet chariot.” And his wireless needed a new
accumulator. Curse the river, with its perpetual chuckle and its imbecile tidal
vagaries. He knew the Ouse at Huntingdon—slow, solitary, regulated by pumps
and weirs, and little used for boating because of its derelict and weed-grown
locks. He had seen rivers in Scotland, tumbling and brawling and full of stones,
useful for nothing but for fishing in—if you liked that kind of thing. He had even
taken a holiday trip to Ireland and seen the majestic Shannon harnessed and set
to churning out electricity. But this river was a secretive beast and no good to
anybody. What was the sense of a river with three feet between its high and low

tide twice a day?
He looked at the mooring-post again (“Swing low, sweet chario-ot”) and
measured with his eye the distance between the hitch of rope and the level of the
river. Nearly eight feet. Neddy was right. Anybody on the river waiting to loose
the boat at low tide would have to cut the painter. The boat would swing very
low indeed (“coming for to carry me home”), and the painter would need to be a
long one, if the boat was to ride in the water. Suddenly he got up, started out of
his drowsy ruminations.
“I say, sonny,” he said aloud.
Peter emerged from the boat-house.
“How long should you say your painter was?”
“It’s about three fathoms—eighteen feet, you know. It has to be pretty long,
you see, to allow for the fall of the tide.”
“Yes, I thought it would be.” Rudge measured with his eye the end of rope as
it trailed in the stream, then tried to remember the look of the end left on the
Vicar’s boat. Five feet or so at the most, he thought. But he couldn’t be sure.
Probably it was quite all right, but, just as a matter of routine, it wouldn’t be a
bad idea to fit the two cut ends together. He stared at the post again. He could
see clearly in his mind’s eye the Vicar’s boat with the new manilla cut through
and Neddy Ware demonstrating on his plug of tobacco the sharpness of the knife
that had made the cut. The sun on the river was dazzling. Gazing at the post,
Rudge’s eyes swam with water. But it seemed to him that that end was cut less
cleanly than the other.
“What is it?” asked Peter, staring first at the post and then at the Inspector.
“Nothing much,” said Rudge, “just a little job I thought of, which I shall have
to see to presently. I’ll go across now, I think, if you are not wanting the punt.”
He poled himself across without disaster, and found P.C. Bancock stolidly
reading a newspaper on the farther bank. Telling him to keep an eye on the
house and to take any telephone messages, Rudge hurriedly climbed into the
police car and drove round across Fernton Bridge to Lingham. The Vicar’s boat
was there, having been carefully loaded on to a farm cart and locked up in the
“Dance Hall” of the local pub, where also lay, in charge of the local undertaker,
the body of Admiral Penistone. On consideration Rudge had thought this the
best arrangement, since the inquest would have to be held at Lingham, and it
seemed better to leave the body there for the present, bringing it back, if
necessary, to Rundel Croft for the funeral.
But the body did not interest Rudge for the moment. The boat with its painter
was his object. On entering the “Dance Hall” Rudge found the police
photographer in possession. He appeared to have reaped a rich crop of finger-

prints, and was now methodically exposing plates upon them. Rudge nodded to
him to carry on, and then pulling out a folding tape-measure from his pocket he
stretched it carefully along the painter. The precise measurement came out at
four feet nine inches, from the cut end to the ring on the boat’s nose.
He came out again, drove back, cursing the silly necessity of having to go
three miles out of his way on every journey and, returning to Rundel Croft, got
out the punt once more. Poling across to the mooring-post, he took his
measurements.
From the bottom of the hitch to the end of the rope was eight feet, and,
allowing for the rope used in surrounding the post and making the hitches, and
for the spare end, you got another three feet. That brought the whole length of
rope on the post to eleven feet. Add four feet nine inches, and you got a total of
fifteen feet nine inches only. Two feet three inches of rope still remained
unaccounted for.
Rudge, clinging affectionately with one arm to the post while he made his
measurements, and digging his toes well in to prevent the punt from drifting off
and leaving him like a monkey on a stick, shook his head at this. Then he took
the cut end of the painter in his hand and considered it attentively. He had been
right. This was no clean cut like the other. A sharp knife had been used, but the
rope had parted gradually, the strands loosening out under the strain and one
final strand having ravelled out beyond the rest.
He was left with his new puzzle. Why should anybody need a bit of rope only
a couple of feet long? It could hardly have been used to tie anything up, for the
thickness of the rope meant that nearly the whole of this length would be taken
up in making the knot. Well—it was one more riddle.
He pushed off from the post and took up the punt-pole once more. That piece
of rope ought to be found if possible. But probably it had merely been thrown
into the river, and if so, it would have gone out to sea by this time. Or (since the
ridiculous Whyn flowed both ways) it might have gone up-stream after the
Admiral. That did not seem to be a very promising line of research.
No message of any kind had been received at the house during his absence,
and not quite knowing what to do, he wandered into the Admiral’s study. There
he found the sergeant, who, after considerable back-chat with the local
exchange, had succeeded in getting through to the Admiralty and was trying to
explain to a languid voice at the other end what department he wanted and whom
he wished to speak to. The Inspector took over the instrument.
“This is the Whynmouth police,” he said, in a peremptory tone calculated to
convey that, though the Navy might be the Senior Service, the Law was more
important still. “We want information about the career of Admiral Penistone,

retired, late of the Chinese Squadron, and now living at Lingham. Will you
kindly put me on to the proper person at once. The matter is urgent.”
“Oh!” said the voice. “What do you want to know about him? I could look up
his record for you, of course, I—”
“I don’t want that,” said the Inspector. “I want to speak confidentially to
somebody in authority—and the quicker the better.”
“Oh!” said the voice again. “Well, I don’t know. You see, everybody’s out at
lunch, I think. One o’clock, you know. Look here. I think you’d better ring up
again in an hour or two and ask for Extension fifty-five—they’ll probably be
able to tell you something there, don’t you know. I’ll send them a chit about it.”
“Thank you.” The Inspector slammed the receiver down and, after allowing
the statutory thirty seconds, took it off again.
“Number please,” said the exchange.
“Look here, miss,” said Rudge. “Have you got a London telephone directory?
You have. Good. Would you look up the number of Messrs. Dakers and Dakers
for me? They’re solicitors in—wait a moment—in Lincoln’s Inn. Yes, I’ll spell
that. That’s right, Dakers and Dakers. It’s rather urgent.”
“I’ll r-r-ring you,” said the exchange.
The remarks of the young man at the Admiralty had reminded Rudge that he
had been on the job since six o’clock and had had no breakfast. He rang the bell
and asked Emery if he could be given something to eat.
“Well,” said the retainer, dubiously, “I don’t know, I suppose so.” He
pondered, and then added: “Me and Mrs. Emery was just sitting down to
gammon rashers. I dare say you could have a gammon rasher if you fancied it.”
The idea seemed good to the Inspector. He replied that he should fancy it very
much indeed.
“Well, I’ll tell her,” said Emery. He went out, and returned again in a few
minutes.
“I suppose you would be wanting something to drink,” he suggested,
reluctantly.
“Anything that’s going,” said Rudge, pleasantly.
“Well, I dare say you could have a glass of beer,” said Emery. “Me and Mrs.
Emery was just sitting down to a glass. Mrs. Emery felt she needed a drop of
something to raise her spirits.”
The Inspector readily accepted the offer of beer. Emery shambled slowly
away, returning presently to enquire:
“If I was to bring it in on a tray, would that do for you? We ain’t never been
accustomed to have the police about the place.”
The Inspector signified that whatever was most convenient to Mr. and Mrs.

Emery would suit him. The man retired again, and after a considerable time
returned to announce in a mournful tone:
“Mrs. Emery says you can have a gammon rasher if you want it. She says she
hasn’t made no sweet to-day, on account of being low in her spirits, but perhaps
a piece of the Stilton would do for you.”
The Inspector replied that it would do admirably, and at that moment the
telephone rang. On answering it Rudge found that he was through to Mr.
Dakers’s office. Mr. Edwin Dakers and Mr. Trubody were both out. Could the
speaker do anything?
The Inspector explained that he wanted to speak urgently to Mr. Edwin
Dakers on business connected with Admiral Penistone. No, he was not speaking
for the Admiral. The Admiral, in fact, was dead.
“Indeed? Mr. Dakers will be very sorry to hear that.”
“In fact,” said the Inspector, “he has died under very mysterious
circumstances. I represent the police.”
“Indeed? Mr. Dakers will be greatly distressed. If you will give me your
number, I will ask him to ring you as soon as he comes in.”
The Inspector thanked the speaker and then remembered that Sergeant
Appleton was still somewhere about, and unfed. He rang the bell again. Emery
shuffled in and began at once with a reproachful expression.
“Now it ain’t no good you ringing. Nobody can’t hurry a gammon rasher.
They wants a good deal of cooking if they ain’t to give you bile.”
“Quite so,” said Rudge, “but I was thinking about my sergeant. Do you think
you could manage a meal for him too?”
“The sergeant,” said Emery, “is taking a bite in the kitchen along of me and
Mrs. Emery. No offence, I hope.”
“Certainly not, no,” said Rudge, “I’m very glad he should.” Emery withdrew
again, while the Inspector pondered on Sergeant Appleton’s superior enterprise
and resourcefulness.
The gammon rasher—cut thick and well fried up—was brought in by Mrs.
Emery, a little bird-like woman with snapping eyes and a masterfulness of
manner which explained to some extent her husband’s crushed and wilted
appearance. A single glance at the perfectly-cooked rasher with its
accompanying green peas and chips explained another riddle. Evidently,
Emery’s feeble-mindedness was the price the Admiral paid for Mrs. Emery’s
culinary skill.
Rudge expressed his appreciation.
“And how I could bring myself to do it I’m sure I don’t know,” said Mrs.
Emery, “with the poor master gone so sudden and Miss Elma away and the

whole place in a uproar. Even the very smell of the meat seems almost ’eartless,
as you might say. But there! that Emery is a man and man must ’ave ’is meat, if
the ’ole world was to be swallowed up in Noah’s flood.”
“True,” said the Inspector, “we are a callous sex, I’m afraid, Mrs. Emery. It’s
a great upset to you naturally. And with Miss Fitzgerald going away
unexpectedly it’s all left on your shoulders.”
“Ah!” said Mrs. Emery. “And when isn’t it left on my shoulders, I should like
to know? A lot Miss Elma troubled herself about the house. Might be a man for
all the help she was. Now the poor Admiral, he liked to have things pleasant
about him, and for all he was sharp in his ways, it was a pleasure to serve him.
Many’s the time I’ve had to speak sharp to Emery, for I could see as his shiftless
ways was a hard trial to the master—but there! Emery’s but a poor creature,
though he is my husband. The Admiral, he gave him notice to leave at the end of
the month but there! I didn’t pay no attention. I just cooked him a nice dinner,
such as he had a fancy for, and he said to me, ‘Mrs. Emery, tell that blistering
swab of a husband of yours that he can stay on and here’s half a guinea for you
to buy a bit o’ ribbon.’ He was a good master, and I’d say so if I was on my
death-bed.”
“I’m sure of it,” said Rudge, sympathetically. He felt that he had
unaccountably neglected Mrs. Emery. If you want the truth about a man’s
character, he had always maintained, ask the servants. He now had two
testimonies in the Admiral’s favour and he felt they were to be relied upon.
Neddy Ware had echoed the opinion of the Admiral’s own crew—and a crew is
seldom mistaken about its captain. And Mrs. Emery’s evidence agreed with
theirs.
“I suppose,” he said, “that Admiral Penistone was a bit short-tempered at
times, eh?”
“I don’t think none the worse of him for that,” retorted Mrs. Emery. “I’d
rather a man was short-tempered than poor-spirited any day. And the master had
a lot to put up with. What with Miss Elma treating him so bad, and his worries
and one thing and another—”
“What worries were those?”
“Well, now, Inspector, I don’t know as I could rightly say what worries. But I
did hear as he hadn’t been treated proper by the Admiralty when he was a young
man, and he never rightly got over it. Something to do with foreign parts, it was,
and he’d say that he’d get himself set right yet, if it took him a lifetime. But Miss
Elma, she hadn’t no more sympathy with him than a man hasn’t when you’re
fratcheted to death with babies.” Without pausing to explain this obscure
comparison, Mrs. Emery went on still more rapidly. “She wouldn’t listen to a

word, Miss Elma wouldn’t, just sat there looking as sulky as a cow and wouldn’t
so much as put her hand to a duster or put up a vase of flowers to make the place
look homelike. And sorry I’m sure I am for Mr. Holland, and him such a nice
gentleman, if he marries our young lady, though what he could see in her I don’t
know. It’s a miracle to me, with all these decent, sensible girls about that a man
will always pick on the wrong sort, and as to being good-looking, I never could
see it.”
“Well,” said Rudge, “it’s past praying for now. They were married this
morning.”
“Well, I never,” said Mrs. Emery. “That’s what your sergeant was looking so
sly about! ‘There’s a surprise in store for you, ma’am,’ he says, ‘but I’ll not tell
you,’ he says, ‘for you’ll be hearing it soon enough.’ Fancy! But if that isn’t just
like Miss Elma, before her poor uncle’s cold as you might say, the ’eartless
’ussy! And surprised I am at Mr. Holland doing such a thing, but there!
Anything she said he followed like a lamb with a blue ribbon round its neck, but
them big fellows is often the meekest when it comes to a woman.”
“You think Mr. Holland is very fond of Miss Fitzgerald, then?” suggested
Rudge. Would he ever get to the bottom of the relations between this pair? No
two people seemed to agree about them.
“Fond he was,” said Mrs. Emery, “and is, I’ve no doubt, though how long it
lasts is another matter. She took it cool enough, but that’s her way. Herself and
her fancies, that’s all that young lady ever was in love with, if you ask me, and
he’ll soon find it out. Things look different when you’re married. Artful she was,
too, leading him on and putting him off as the fancy took her. But as to caring
for him, no, and the master knew that as well as anybody. If he’d been alive they
wouldn’t have got married so easy, and that’s a fact, but to go right off and join
their ’ands over his dead body, as you might say, is what I shouldn’t hardly have
thought Mr. Holland capable of.”
“H’m!” said the Inspector. He was trying to remember how long it took to get
a special license. He seemed to remember dimly that it required at least a day’s
notice. “Maybe they had planned to get married to-day in any case.”
“Then they ought to have altered their plan,” replied Mrs. Emery. “Disgusting,
I call it. But I shouldn’t wonder if they had, come to think of it. Maybe that’s
what Mr. Holland was so anxious to see the Admiral about last night.”
“Oh, yes. He rang up from Whynmouth, didn’t he?”
“He did. I took the message myself. Wanted to see the master very urgent. I
said as him and Miss Elma was over at the Vicarage and wouldn’t be back till
late—for I expected they’d stop to eleven o’clock or such, playing cards or
something of that. The Vicar don’t mind playing cards for all he’s such a man

for services and saints’ days, but that’s only to be expected, for fancy dress and
candles is not what you could call religion, don’t you think so yourself? Well, I
said to him, they won’t be back till eleven, I said, saying what I thought right at
the time, which I couldn’t be expected to know they would be early that night of
all nights. One can but act for the best. So I said, why not go over to the
Vicarage, but Mr. Holland says, ‘no, he’ll leave it and perhaps he might come up
later.’”
“And did he?”
“Not that I know of, but there, I’m a sound sleeper, thank God, and need to be,
the work there is in this house. Emery, he’s supposed to do the cleaning, but half
the time I has to do it after him, and as for Jennie, she’s a good girl but run off
her feet by Miss Elma as won’t do step or stitch for herself. Cooking is what I
was engaged to do and with Miss Elma breakfasting in bed and getting up at all
hours, I’ve only got one pair of hands.”
“Quite so,” said Rudge, “and very capable ones I’m sure they are, Mrs.
Emery.”
“I’m sure I said when I come here as I ought to have a kitchen-maid under me,
with all these brick floors. That’s the worst of these old-fashioned houses. But
I’ve no complaint of the Admiral, for a rich man he was not, not but what she
might have done something to help him if she had liked, for she’s got plenty, so
I’m told. And what she did with her allowance it’s difficult to say, not that it’s
any of my business, for it’s not, but nobody can’t help their thoughts. And spend
it on dress she did not, nobody could say that against her, barring an evening
frock now and again, or a handsome coat. But them’s not the things as takes the
money, as you’ll know well enough if you’re a married man. It’s the shoes and
gloves and bags and stockings and jumpers. And I’m sure Miss Elma bothered as
little about them as a young lady could do. That French maid she had, she used
to complain dreadful of the shabby way Miss Elma went about.”
“Ah, yes—the French girl. What was she like?”
“Girl?” said Mrs. Emery. “They calls ’em all girls nowadays. But if ever she
sees forty again, I’ll be surprised. A nice little thing enough, to speak to, and
spoke English beautiful. But I don’t like a maid as is too intimate with her
mistress. I’ve seen Miss Elma catch that woman’s eye sometimes, when the
master happened to be a bit put out and looks pass between them which did not
ought to pass between persons in their stations of life. Let servants stick together
and masters stick together—that’s my motto, but for young ladies to be taking
their maids into their confidences about the master of the house is unbecoming,
to my way of thinking. It’s my belief there was some trouble about it, or why did
Ma’amselle go off so quick without her wages? There’s the front door bell,

who’ll that be, I wonder? I hope Emery is answering it, as it’s his place to do,
but he’s that flustered with all this. You’ll have noticed, I dare say, as his head’s
not very strong. Now, I’m different. I’m one of the noticing sort. I may have
been only a month with the Admiral, but a woman that’s experienced—and I’ve
been in many places in my time—don’t take long putting two and two together.
Oh, I could size up Miss Elma all right. Ah! Emery has remembered his duty for
once, I’m glad to say.”
The door opened and Emery poked in his melancholy head.
“Here’s two newspaper gentlemen waiting to see the Inspector.”
Rudge was about to consign the newspaper gentlemen to a warm spot, when it
occurred to him that all God’s creatures have their uses. He glanced at the card
held out to him, and observed that it bore the magic words, Evening Gazette.
“I’ll see them,” he said, shortly.
The two newspaper gentlemen were ushered in—a breezy man with a cropped
head and horn-rimmed spectacles, the upper portion of whose face appeared to
have been darkened by some ineffectual form of sunburn application (“all
handsome men are slightly sunburned”), and a morose man with a camera.
“Now,” said Rudge, “how did you boys get on to this?”
Cropped-head grinned.
“Information received, eh, Inspector? ‘If it’s not in the Gazette then it hasn’t
happened yet.’ We had it on the streets in the twelve-thirty. Do your best for us,
won’t you?”
“Well,” said Rudge. He thought for a moment and then gave them as much
information as he thought was bound to come out in any case.
“That’s O.K.,” said Cropped-head. “Now, as regards yourself, Inspector. Our
readers will want to know all about you. Perhaps you would be good enough to
come and be photographed in the boat-house? Adds interest to the picture, you
know. Well, that’s awfully good of you. It won’t take a minute. Is that the
Admiral’s boat? Just point carelessly towards it. That’s fine. Make a good
picture, eh, Tom?”
Rudge, in spite of himself, felt rather flattered.
“We shall say, of course, that you have the case well in hand and that there’s
obviously no need to call in Scotland Yard. Just so. Now, how about this niece?
Could we get a word with her at all?”
“No,” said Rudge. “As a matter of fact,” he added handsomely, “I don’t mind
telling you something about her.”
The reporter was eagerly attentive.
“She went off to London this morning,” said the Inspector impressively, “and
got married—to a man called Arthur Holland, a trader, from China.”

“Did she? Quick work. That’ll make a good story. Why the haste?”
“I can’t tell you that yet. But look here. If I let you have that story exclusively,
will you do something for me?”
“Sure thing.”
“I want to find out about Admiral Penistone’s past career. Why he sent in his
papers at forty-three, and why he rejoined the Navy afterwards and all about it.”
“Oh! I can tell you something about that,” the reporter laughed. “I got that out
of a man I know in the Chinese Embassy. The old boy got into trouble in Hong
Kong in 1911. Some private matter. Something to do with a woman. One of the
things that aren’t done by naval officers. He was requested to send in his papers.
No public scandal—you know the sort of thing. My man didn’t know all the
details, but he promised to get them for me. I’ll let you have anything I get hold
of. I dare say we shan’t print it all, because some of the parties may be alive, but
I’ll send you the dope on the whole thing. And, I say—if there’s anything
coming along that you feel you can let us have straight from the gee-gee’s
mouth, you will, won’t you? That’s a bargain.”
Rudge agreed readily enough. This was a great deal more hopeful than
unwinding red tape from the Admiralty. Trouble in Hong Kong in 1911? That
explained matters. No doubt as Penistone was a smart officer they were glad
enough to let him rejoin in 1914. But it would have made a difference to him,
naturally. Soured the old boy’s temper a bit, no doubt. Was it possible that the
murder was the aftermath of that old affair? It seemed a long time to keep up
resentment, but where Chinks were concerned you never knew. And, by the way,
Holland had lately come from China. What was that Mrs. Emery had said about
Holland? He had said he might walk over to Rundel Croft after eleven. Suppose
he had done so?
Obviously Holland and Elma must be got hold of. They would have to be
subp naed for the inquest in any case. He must tackle the coroner about that. A
little job for Sergeant Appleton. He returned to the house and despatched his
subordinate with a note. Hardly had he done so when the telephone rang.
Mr. Edwin Dakers was on the line. He was indeed grieved and horrified to
hear of the Admiral’s death. He thought he had better come down to Rundel
Croft at once. As Miss Fitzgerald’s trustee and representative, it would be
necessary for him to see her without delay. Doubtless she was greatly upset by
this melancholy occurrence.
“I haven’t noticed it,” replied Rudge, with a sort of grim satisfaction. “In fact,
no sooner did Miss Fitzgerald hear of her uncle’s death than she went up to town
and got married to a Mr. Holland. I should be glad, sir—”
“What!” said Mr. Dakers, in a tone so aghast that it seemed to shake the

instrument.
Rudge repeated his information.
“God bless my soul!” said Mr. Dakers, and paused for such a long time that
Rudge began to think he had fallen dead with horror. Then he said:
“This is very unfortunate indeed, Inspector. I am more than shocked. I am
horrified.”
“It certainly looks a bit unfeeling,” said Rudge.
“Unfeeling?” said Mr. Dakers. “It may be most gravely prejudicial to her
monetary interests. Can you tell me where to find her?”
“They were staying at the Carlton, she said,” replied Rudge. “Miss Fitzgerald
—that is, Mrs. Holland—” (Mr. Dakers groaned faintly) “mentioned that they
were going to a dance this evening. I should be glad, sir—”
“A dance at the Carlton?” interrupted the lawyer. “She must be out of her
senses. T’chk, t’chk, t’chk. Most distressing. I am not quite clear upon the point
of law involved, but if I remember rightly, the Master of the Rolls held in the
case of—dear me! I think I shall have to take Counsel’s opinion. In the
meanwhile I thank you very much for apprising me of these events. I shall go
and see my client immediately, and—”
“I hope you will, sir, and I should be very glad if you could persuade her to
come back at once. Mr. and Mrs. Holland will be subp naed, of course, but in
the meantime it would be desirable—”
“Of course, of course,” replied Mr. Dakers, “most unfortunate and
unbecoming. I shall make a point of advising her to return home without delay.”
“Thank you, sir, and I should be very glad, sir, if I might have a word with
you at some time myself. There are one or two little matters which I should like
to have cleared up, in connection with a document we have here.”
“Oh!” said Mr. Dakers. “Yes?”
“In connection,” pursued Rudge, “with a copy of a will, sir, made by John
Martin Fitzgerald in 1915.”
“Ah!” said Mr. Dakers. His voice sounded cautious. “Yes. Yes, I see. In what
way, precisely, are you interested in that will?”
Rudge coughed.
“Well, sir, in a general way, as you might say. There’s a brother mentioned in
it, for example, and one or two other points that might be of interest.”
“Yes, I see. Well, Inspector, I think the best way will be for me to see you
myself. I will endeavour to bring Miss Fitz—that is, Mrs. Holland, down with
me, but in any case, I shall arrive at Lingham to-night. Where shall I find you?”
“I shall be at Rundel Croft, sir.”
“Very well. I will telephone you when to expect me. When are you holding

the inquest?”
“I should think the day after to-morrow, sir.”
“Yes. I shall be there, of course, to represent Mrs. Holland. I think I should
have been notified of this matter earlier. How is it that you did not ring me up till
one o’clock?”
The Inspector would have liked to say that it was not his business to notify the
solicitors of suspected or suspicious persons, but he replied meekly that he had
been busy and had only just had time to digest the contents of the will.
“It is unfortunate,” he added, “that Mrs. Holland did not herself acquaint you
with the state of affairs.”
“It is; very,” replied the lawyer, dryly. “Very well, Inspector, we will leave it
like that.”
He rang off.
“And that’s that,” thought Rudge, discontentedly. “Nothing for it I suppose
but to wait for the old blighter. Still, if he brings the Hollands back, that’s
something to the good. It’s a pity there seems to be so little one can get on with.
Hollands gone to town, Denny gone to town. Well, what about those cuttings?”
He had not yet looked through the file of newspaper cuttings. They might
perhaps suggest something in connection with Penistone’s mysterious past. Or
there might be other papers of interest.
The cuttings, as he had rather expected, seemed mostly to have to do with
China, though a section of them seemed to be concerned with naval affairs. They
dated from two years before the War and were neatly numbered and docketed to
correspond with an alphabetical index in the Admiral’s handwriting. Rudge
noted a small bunch of cuttings collected under the heading, “Denny, W.” These
he turned over eagerly. They told him that Sir Wilfrid Denny had been for many
years in the Hong Kong customs, retiring in 1921 with a title and pension.
Apparently Denny had only come to Whynmouth in 1925, having previously
lived in Hertfordshire. He was a widower of sixty-four, his wife having died
fifteen years previously, in China. He had no surviving children, his only son
had been killed in the War.
This was interesting. Sir Wilfrid, then, had also been connected with China.
No doubt his friendship with the Admiral had dated from the latter’s period of
service on the Chinese station. Rudge returned the cuttings to their folder and
was about to replace them in their file, when he noticed an endorsement on the
folder “See H 5 and X 57.”
What this cryptic reference might mean he could not think. He tried number
five in the H file and found that it referred to a single cutting about an Able
Seaman named Hendry who had been killed in a brawl in Hong Kong some

years previously. This looked hopeful, but in turning to file X, he found no
entries under that awkward letter. And indeed fifty-seven entries under X would,
he thought, be unusual. “X” must refer to something different. To what?
He turned to the alphabetical list, and under the letter F his eye was arrested
by another entry. “Fitzgerald, W. E.” The missing brother of Elma! Surely this
would be of interest. Eagerly he turned up the file.
The folder marked “Fitzgerald, W. E.” contained nothing but a slip of paper
on which was scribbled in pencil, “See X.”
“Damn X!” thought Rudge, “where the devil has ‘X’ gone to? Perhaps it was
particularly private. The old boy may have hidden it in some safer place.”
Filled with excitement he began a thorough and careful search of the cabinet
and the desk. The cabinet yielded nothing, nor, on a superficial examination, did
the desk. At length, however, after lifting a mass of receipts and old chequebooks out of the well of the desk, Rudge came to a sliding bottom. He pushed
this back and disclosed a key-hole. A little search of the Admiral’s key-ring
revealed a key of suitable size. He fitted it in. It turned easily. The door slid back
and disclosed a folder similar to those in the cabinet and marked “X.”
Before he had lifted it out, Rudge knew that he was to be disappointed. The
folder lay flat as a visiting-card, and was, in fact, perfectly empty.
He was still gazing at it in chagrin, when the door opened to admit Jennie with
a tea-tray.
“So you’re back, Jennie,” said Rudge, pleasantly. “It’s very kind of you to
bring me tea. Is your mother better?”
“Well, she’s none so good, Mr. Rudge, thank you. Doctor, he says it’s her
back. He’s been down to her twice to-day and she’s a bit easier now, but she’s
still very low.”
Rudge expressed his sympathy and noted that the sick mother seemed to be
genuine enough. When he had eaten his tea, he continued his search for the
missing contents of the folder, but without success. Three telephone calls came
to break the monotony: one from the coroner, asking Rudge to come and see him
first thing next morning; the next from Mr. Dakers to say that he was still trying
to get in touch with the Hollands and would be down on the eight-fifty; the third,
much later, from the Vicar.
“I am speaking from the Charing Cross Hotel,” said the crisp Oxford voice. “I
find I shall be obliged to spend the night in town. I will ring you up again in the
morning.”
Rudge thanked him, and rang off. Then after a minute or two he took an
obvious precaution. He rang up the Charing Cross Hotel.
“Have you a Mr. Mount—Rev. Philip Mount—staying in the hotel?”

A slight pause; then: “Yes, sir.”
“Is Mr. Mount in the hotel?”
“I will enquire; will you hold the line, sir?”
A subdued babel; then the metallic clack of advancing footsteps and the rattle
of the receiver.
“Hullo, yes: who is it, please?”
“That’s him all right,” thought Rudge. Aloud he said, “I just remembered
something I wanted to ask you, sir,” and repeated his question about the length
of the painter.
The Vicar confirmed Peter’s statement and Rudge thanked him and rang off.
“All O.K. so far. I didn’t like him going off like that, but he seems straight
enough. Hope he is, because of these kids. But that rope’s a teaser and no
mistake.”
The eight-fifty arrived at Whynmouth in due course, and presently a taxi drew
up at Rundel Croft. Rudge heard it turn up the drive and stop. His hopes rose,
then sank again as he heard the door-bell.
“Mrs. Holland would have walked in,” he muttered, disappointed. “But no!”
He cheered up again. “The door’s locked, of course, because of possible
intruders.”
Emery’s steps shuffled through the hall. The study door opened and a tall,
thin, grey-headed man was shown in—alone.
“Mr. Dakers?” said Rudge, rising and executing something between a salute
and a bow.
“Yes,” said the lawyer, “and you, I take it, are Inspector Rudge. Quite so.
Well now, Inspector, I am sorry to say I have failed to see either Mr. or Mrs.
Holland. They are certainly staying at the Carlton, and were expected back to
dinner. I have left a note for Mrs. Holland expressed in such terms that I think
she can scarcely fail to pay attention to it. I need not say again how shocked and
grieved I am at the whole occurrence.”
“I quite see your point of view, sir,” said Rudge, “and I may add that the
absence of Mr. and Mrs. Holland is making my own task none the easier. By the
way, sir, I am in a somewhat peculiar position in this house, with Admiral
Penistone dead and nobody else in charge, so to speak, but I dare say I shan’t be
out of order in asking you if you have dined, before we go on to business.”
“Thank you, Inspector, thank you—but I require nothing. I am obliged to you.
I should like to hear at once all the details of this sad affair.”
Rudge rapidly outlined the circumstances of the Admiral’s death and the
departure of his niece, while Mr. Dakers contributed a running commentary of
“Tuts” and “Dear, dears.”

“There seems to be no doubt then, that Admiral Penistone was murdered.”
“None at all, I am afraid, sir.”
“He could not, I suppose, have—er—made away with himself and thrown the
weapon into the river.”
This solution had not presented itself to Rudge, but he replied that judging by
the position of the body and the general circumstances, he thought it almost
outside the bounds of probability.
Mr. Dakers nodded mournfully.
“I take it,” he said, with the air of a man taking a ferocious bull by the horns,
“that there is—er—no suspicion attaching to my ward or her husband?”
“Well,” said Rudge, cautiously, “I couldn’t say that suspicion attaches to any
particular person so far. And other things being equal, the crime is certainly not
the kind that we would suspect a young lady of. We know very little as yet about
Mr. Holland. Possibly you can help us there, sir?”
Mr. Dakers shook his head.
“I know very little about him, beyond his name, and the fact that he was, in a
manner, engaged to my ward.”
“Did the engagement have Admiral Penistone’s consent, sir?”
The lawyer looked very shrewdly at him.
“I see what is in your mind, Inspector. Well, I suppose that is only to be
expected, and it is quite useless for me to attempt to disguise the facts. So far as I
know, Admiral Penistone, while reluctant as yet to give his consent to the
marriage, had not definitely forbidden it. That is as much as I can tell you.”
“I see, sir. Now about this will of John Martin Fitzgerald; I presume that Mr.
Fitzgerald is dead, since you and the late Admiral were acting as trustees for
Mrs. Holland. Is this the copy of the actual will that was proved at the time of
death?”
“It is. My friend John Fitzgerald was a solicitor; he died in 1916, and this was
his latest will. I cannot say that it was a will I should have cared to draw up for
him myself, nor was it, I think, a will he would willingly have drawn for one of
his clients, but you know, Inspector, solicitors are notorious for making bad
disposals of their own property.”
“What was the will proved at?”
“At about £50,000. That,” said Mr. Dakers, “did not represent the rewards of
the law; the greater part of the money was inherited. But I had better begin from
the beginning. John Fitzgerald married in 1888 Mary Penistone, the sister of the
late Admiral. She died in 1911, and left two surviving children: Walter Everett,
born in 1889, and Elma Mary, born nine years later, in 1898. When Walter was
twenty, he got into some kind of trouble at home. I think it had to do with a

young woman who was attached to the family in a dependent position—in fact,
the governess. His father was extremely angry and there was a terrible quarrel.
Young Walter ran away from home and disappeared, and for some time his
name was not allowed to be mentioned. You know the kind of thing. Elma, of
course, was too young to be told what the trouble was about, but Mrs. Fitzgerald
always considered that her husband was too hard upon the boy.
“She died, as I say, in 1911, and I really think the worry about Walter helped
to break up her health—in fact, as we used to say, it broke her heart. I know John
Fitzgerald thought so, and it had a very softening effect upon him. He made
efforts to find Walter, though without success, and he executed a will, dividing
his property between Walter and Elma.
“Nothing was heard of Walter till the early part of 1915, when he sent his
father a letter written from ‘Somewhere in France.’ He expressed himself as
sorry for his previous bad behaviour and six years of neglect, hoped he was
forgiven, and said that he was now endeavouring to turn over a new leaf and do
his duty to his country. No word about where he had been in the interval. At the
same time he enclosed ‘in case of accident’ a will drawn in favour of his sister
Elma. His father and sister wrote back at once telling him to come home as soon
as he got leave, and that all would be forgiven and forgotten. He never did come
home, though he wrote from time to time, and after the disastrous battle of Loos
his name appeared in the lists of ‘missing, believed killed.’ His father was at that
time a very sick man. He was suffering from Bright’s disease, and had not very
much longer to live. He absolutely refused to believe that Walter was dead. He
had turned up before, he said, and would turn up again. Having in the meantime
come into a large property, he redrafted his will of 1911, leaving the disposition
of his estate the same as before, but with certain additional clauses.
“I must now say a word about his brother-in-law, Admiral Penistone. He—
you may know something about his history?”
“I have heard that there was some sort of interruption to his career in 1911.”
“Oh, you know about that? Yes, a disgraceful business. I need not go into
details, but the affair was one which made it extremely unsuitable that he should
be appointed as guardian of the young girl. Understand me, I express no opinion
as to whether Captain Penistone (as he was then) was actually to blame in the
matter. But the mere fact that his name had been connected with such an
unsavoury business should have been sufficient. However, John Fitzgerald, who
never would believe ill of anybody—”
“An unusual trait in a lawyer,” Rudge could not help remarking.
“My good man, a lawyer in his private capacity and in his professional
capacity may be two very different people,” retorted Mr. Dakers, with some

asperity. “John Fitzgerald could not think ill of his wife’s brother. He maintained
that Penistone had been unfairly treated, and by way of showing the world what
he thought about it, he made him Elma’s trustee, and inserted that preposterous
clause about her marriage.”
“You yourself,” suggested Rudge, “accepted co-trusteeship with Admiral
Penistone.”
“And if I had not,” said Mr. Dakers, “he might have appointed some other
black sheep who needed whitewashing. No. I made the best of a bad job, out of
consideration for my poor friend’s daughter. And I must say, in justice to
Admiral Penistone, that I have had no cause to complain of his management of
his ward’s affairs. Although his manner was abrupt and at times disagreeable, I
believe him to have been a perfectly honest man as regards money, nor was there
anything unbecoming about the household he set up for his niece. Had there
been, I should, of course, have interfered.”
“By whose wish was it that Miss Fitzgerald went to live with her uncle?”
“By her father’s. I thought it unsuitable, but I could produce no valid grounds
of opposition. Elma’s share of the money was invested, by my advice, in sound
securities, and the payments made to her quarterly by the trustees.”
“A very nice little income,” remarked Rudge.
“About £1,500 a year.”
“It surprises me a little,” said Rudge, “that the Admiral did not keep up a more
elaborate establishment for his niece. This house is pleasant enough, but it is
very remote, and they did not see much company, or so I understand.”
“That is true,” admitted Mr. Dakers, “but it was not altogether Admiral
Penistone’s fault. He himself naturally shrank from going much into society, and
from 1914 to 1918 he was, of course, on active service, but he put no restrictions
upon his niece. She was given a good education and had the advantage of two
London seasons under the chaperonage of a very suitable lady, but I fancy that
society life was distasteful to her.”
“Odd that she should not have got married earlier,” said Rudge. “A young
lady with £25,000 or so should have had plenty of offers.”
The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.
“I fancy that Elma was—a little difficult,” he said. “She is perhaps not—
attractive, in what I may call the marrying sense. There were some—needy
persons, of course, but they were not encouraged. Admiral Penistone would not
have dreamed of consenting to a marriage except with a man of independent
means. And then, unfortunately, there was the scandal about Walter.”
“What was that?”
“Why, that happened in 1920. Obviously the first thing that seemed advisable

was to obtain from the Courts leave to presume Walter’s death. We could not do
anything till 1919, after the release of the British prisoners of war in Germany.
His name was in none of the lists, and we expected to encounter no difficulty.
Curiously enough, however, a man turned up who had been in Walter’s unit in
1915, and this man stated that he had seen Walter alive in Buda-Pesth after the
cessation of hostilities. He said he had not spoken to him, but that he had no
doubt whatever of his identity. Walter was, I believe, a strikingly handsome man
—he certainly was handsome as a boy. He was very like his mother, who was a
most beautiful woman, much better-looking than her brother the Admiral,
though there was a strong family resemblance.
“Well, of course, that meant further delay and more enquiries. We could get
no news of Walter at all, but in view of the evidence of the soldier, the Court
refused to presume death—naturally. Meanwhile, the affair had a very
unfortunate sequel. As soon as it became known that Walter had probably not
been killed during the War, we got the news that there was a warrant out for his
arrest in Shanghai for forgery, if you please.”
“In Shanghai?”
“Yes. The warrant dated from 1914. Apparently Walter, when he left the
country in 1909, had entered the employment of the Anglo-Asiatic Tobacco
Company. He was in Hong Kong at first and in 1913 was transferred to
Shanghai. He got into some sort of financial difficulties, I suppose. Anyway, he
forged a signature of a client of the Company to a large cheque and ran away.
The War broke out just about that time, and I suppose that in the general
confusion the matter was held up or overlooked, till the news that Walter was
supposed to have been killed in 1915 put an end to it. However, when it
appeared likely that Walter had survived after all, up it all came again. The
Admiral was very greatly distressed. This further scandal, cropping up just when
his own old trouble seemed to have been forgotten, soured his temper
completely.”
“I take it Admiral Penistone had rejoined the Navy during the War.”
“Yes. He was a fine officer, and they were glad to get him. He did good
service and finally retired for the second time at the end of the War with the rank
of Rear-Admiral. But if other people had forgotten his previous troubles, he
hadn’t. They preyed on his mind, and this business about Walter finished him
altogether. One man who had been semi-engaged to Elma withdrew rather
pointedly when he heard about the brother, and Admiral Penistone said that he
would not have his niece subjected to insult. He packed up bag and baggage and
took her away with him to live in Cornwall. And there they stayed until a month
ago. All this happened in 1920. Nothing has been heard of Walter since. So you

see that the situation is rather a peculiar one.”
“Yes,” said Rudge thoughtfully. “Walter seems to be awkwardly placed. If he
comes forward and shows himself, he probably goes to penal servitude. If he
doesn’t come forward, he can’t get his money.”
“That is the situation precisely. On the other hand, if he is dead, his share of
the money goes to Elma under his will of 1914. Provided, of course, that is, that
the witness was correct in stating that he was actually still alive after his father’s
death. If not, it still goes to her as residuary legatee under her father’s will.”
“In that case Walter’s death would be to his sister’s financial advantage. I see.
But now, Mr. Dakers, how do things stand with reference to Mrs. Holland’s own
share of her father’s money? I presume that, the Admiral being now dead, the
clause about the consent to the marriage becomes void.”
“That is exactly the difficulty,” replied Mr. Dakers uneasily. “The point of
view taken by the Court in such cases is that the testator cannot have required
the beneficiary to perform impossibilities. Thus it has been held, over and over
again, that in the case of the condition becoming impossible of fulfilment,
through Act of God, the gift remains.”
“Act of God?” queried Rudge.
“Yes. In the case of consent being required to a marriage, for instance, if the
person whose consent is required dies before the marriage, then the condition is
impossible of fulfilment, and the gift stands.”
“Quite so,” said Rudge, “but what does Act of God mean precisely?”
“Well,” said the lawyer, a little reluctantly Rudge thought, “that means—well,
practically speaking, it means, under conditions which the beneficiary could not
have prevented.”
“Let us speak quite plainly,” said Rudge. “If Elma Holland should be found to
have been concerned in Admiral Penistone’s murder—”
“Of course, in that case,” said Mr. Dakers, “there would be no question of her
inheriting. The law expressly forbids a criminal to profit by the fruits of the
crime. But surely that question does not arise.”
“I should hope not,” said Rudge. “Then so far as I can see, Mrs. Holland is
now entitled to her inheritance?”
“Ye-es,” said the lawyer. “I hope the Court will look upon it from that point of
view. The difficulty lies in the extreme haste with which the marriage followed
upon the death. I will be frank with you, Mr. Rudge. I think it would be possible
to contest the case, and I think that, if that occurred, we should have to take one
of two lines about it. We could, of course, say that she intended to ask the
necessary consent before the marriage and that, but for the death, she would
have had time to ask for it. Now, of course, she did ask for it—several times.”

“With any reasonable expectation of ever getting it?” asked Rudge. “Mr.
Dakers,” he added, as the lawyer appeared to hesitate, “I will go so far as to tell
you that I have witnesses here who are prepared to say that the Admiral appeared
not to approve of the marriage.”
“Precisely,” said Mr. Dakers; “I must admit that there was—an appearance at
any rate of objection. And that being the case, I do not quite know what the
Court would think of a marriage so hastily concluded. It might be inferred that
the Admiral was violently opposed to the marriage, and that, therefore, the
marriage was undertaken with a definite intention of frustrating the object of the
testator. The indecent haste attending the ceremony affords, you see, in itself a
presumption that the death of the Admiral removed the only obstacle to the
marriage.”
“And that being so,” said Rudge, “an allegation might be made that the
Admiral’s death was not altogether—shall we say, by Act of God.”
“If such a monstrous allegation were made,” replied Mr. Dakers, “it would
have to be refuted; in which case, the mere fact that the hastiness of the marriage
might jeopardise the absolute right to the estate would constitute a very good
answer to the charge.”
“Yes,” said Rudge, seizing on the weak point of the argument, “provided the
beneficiary was aware how the law stood.” He considered for a moment, and
then said:
“And your second line of defence would be?”
“To show that the ceremony was not arranged until after death had made it
impossible to obtain consent. If it were so—though I do not see how a licence
could have been taken out in the time—it would be a complete answer to the
contesting party. It has frequently so been held. For instance, in Collett v.
Collett, the mother, whose consent was required, died in 1856. In 1865 the
daughter married. The Master of the Rolls held that the gift over (that is, to the
person who was to get the money in case the condition was not fulfilled, you
understand) will not take effect, if the performance of the condition has become
impossible through the Act of God and no default of the person who had to
perform it.” (Mr. Dakers, reading these words from a notebook, glanced over his
pince-nez at Rudge, who said nothing. He resumed.) “‘Here it is reasonably
certain that the mother, if she had lived, would have given her consent to this
marriage, one eligible in all respects.’ There, you see, Inspector, is our difficulty.
The Court seems to have based its decision to some extent on what the mother
might reasonably have been expected to do.”
“I see,” said Rudge. “And in this case the Admiral’s consent could not very
well be presumed with any certainty.”

“There again,” said the lawyer, “who is to say? If the eligibility of the
marriage, as such, is a factor to be taken into consideration, there seems to be no
reason why Admiral Penistone should not have consented. Holland, so far as I
know anything about him, seems to be a respectable man of suitable age and
standing and with sufficient money of his own to take him out of the class of
mere fortune-hunters. It is a very pretty case, Mr. Rudge, and if I were not
personally concerned it would give me great pleasure to see it thrashed out.”
Rudge was about to reply, when the sound of an approaching car was heard. A
slight commotion followed at the front door. Voices and footsteps sounded and a
minute after, the study door was thrown open.
“Inspector,” said Arthur Holland as he followed his wife into the room, “we
owe you an apology for running off like this, but we were in a hurry and were
afraid you might delay us. Is this Mr. Dakers? How do you do, sir? My wife and
I received your note, and thought we had better come and set your mind at rest.”
“Thank you,” said Mr. Dakers, rather dryly. “Well, Elma, you have married in
very great haste. I trust you will not have to repent it at leisure.”
Elma laughed. There was a faint flush of colour in her usually pale cheeks and
she looked, Rudge thought, rather a prey to some consuming excitement than
radiant with the happiness of a newly married woman.
“You have made a mistake, Mr. Dakers,” she said. “I haven’t jeopardised
anything or compromised anything. Look at that.”
She handed him a sheet of paper. Mr. Dakers settled his glasses more firmly
on his nose, read it with a “Tut-tut” or two of astonishment, and handed it over
to Rudge.
“That solves our problems, I think, Inspector.”
Rudge looked at the paper. It was typewritten, with the exception of the
signature, and ran—
“I willingly give my consent to the marriage of my niece, Elma Mary
Fitzgerald, with Arthur Holland.
“(Signed) H. L. PENISTONE.”
It was dated the 9th August.
Inspector Rudge looked at Holland.
“When did this come into your possession, sir?”
“My wife gave it to me this morning,” he said. “She had it last night from the
Admiral.”
“At what time was that, ma’am?” enquired the Inspector.
“Just after midnight,” replied the girl, in a curious flat tone which reminded

Rudge of his interview with her earlier in the day.
“After midnight? Did you see your uncle alive after midnight?”
“Why, of course,” interrupted Holland. “I saw him myself. Yes, I know,
Inspector! I didn’t want to tell you about that because I was afraid you might
stop us from going to town. But I’ll come clean now. I saw the Admiral alive
here in his study at a quarter past twelve last night.”

CHAPTER VIII
By Ronald A. Knox
THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES OF DOUBT
nature of the case, a policeman’s life is bound up with surprises. A
considerable part of the community is only too ready to set playful booby-traps
for him, stretching wires across garden-paths or waiting in dark alleys with half a
brick concealed in the foot of a stocking. Rudge had not risen to his
inspectorship without some experiences of the kind, and he had come near to
achieving that unwondering attitude which is (the old poet assures us) part of the
stuff of happiness. But this sudden admission almost caught him off his guard.
Grice’s statement that the body had been a corpse since some time before
midnight had seemed so evident a point of departure; all the other features of the
case had grouped themselves round it so obligingly—the possibility of a journey
into Whynmouth and foul play down-stream, the visit of the strange car, the
darkness, the loneliness, the set of the tides. (By the way, why had he been so
certain about the tides? Oh, yes, Neddy Ware; odd that Neddy should have been
so positive about it.) Too late he realised that no single piece of evidence, except
the misleading infallibility of the expert, had excluded the possibility of a
murder well after midnight. And this, it seemed now, was what must have
happened. Of course, Holland might be lying, but it was difficult to see his
motive; why abandon a first-class alibi at the Lord Marshall for the honour of
being the last man who saw deceased alive? It would be a fool’s game, and
Holland did not look like a fool.
In a moment, habit reasserted itself; he had drawn out the inevitable notebook,
and was turning over the pages to a blank, remembering not to moisten his finger
as he did so. “I think I ought to tell you, sir,” he explained, “that you are not
bound to make any statement. You know well enough that you will have to be
called at the inquest; and if you prefer to reserve—”
“My defence?” interrupted Holland, with heavy raillery. “It is too kind of you.
But, you see, here I am, all ready binged up with a cock-and-bull story carefully
prepared to mislead you; it would be a pity not to get it off my chest while I’m
word-perfect. You would like to get me in jug first, wouldn’t you, and take down
my statement with no witnesses, so that you could cook it afterwards? I prefer
the present occasion, if you don’t mind.”
IN THE

Rudge just checked himself in time from reminding the unseasonable jester
that he wouldn’t do himself any good by this kind of thing. After all, Holland
evidently belonged to the opulent classes, who get the benefit of the doubt.
“Certainly, sir,” he amended, with some frigidity of manner. “But I think
perhaps if Mrs. Holland—”
“You mean you want to be certain that we both pitch the same yarn? Well, it’s
bad luck, for a man on his honeymoon. But perhaps, Elma, if you wouldn’t mind
—” A rapid look passed between them; on his side, it registered adoring
confidence; on hers, was it a frown over his reckless demeanour? Or was there
not, after all, a faint suspicion of disgust? Mr. Dakers saved the situation, by
indicating that nothing would suit him better than a turn in the garden with—in
short, with Mrs. Holland; there was much that needed discussion, he felt. And
Rudge was left alone with his chief witness.
“Now, sir,” he opened briskly, “when we last met you told a tale which was,
you will admit, in contradiction with what you said just now?”
“These giant intellects! Yes, I told you I was in bed at Whynmouth. Actually I
was here. A discrepancy.”
“Excuse me, sir, but what I’m getting at is this—was it all untrue, what you
told me? For instance, I have it down here that you were not seen by anybody
after eleven o’clock. Do you still stick to that? It doesn’t seem quite so likely,
does it? Perhaps you would try to remember anybody you passed on your way
out here—you will have walked, I suppose? Or did you come by the omnibus?”
“The last ’bus, my dear Rudge, as you and I know very well, leaves at halfpast ten. No, I walked; and I passed some of the gentlemen who had recently left
the Lord Marshall, but they did not look as if they were likely to preserve a clear
memory of their impressions. There were some lovers about, but I am afraid I
cannot swear to their features, and I doubt if they could to mine. I had no speech
with anybody.”
“Didn’t meet one of our men, for example?”
There was a fraction of a pause, almost as if a ready invention were suddenly
at fault.
“No, I think not,” was the answer given. “Once I looked up a side-street, and
thought I saw a policeman’s lantern being flashed, but it might have been
somebody lighting a bicycle lamp. I can’t remember which street it was, now.”
“And you would be coming straight along the main road?”
“All the way.”
“Now, then, sir, let’s get at this, if you don’t mind. Were you meaning to pay
this rather late visit all the time? Or were you delayed on the road? Or did the
idea just come to you suddenly, when it was already closing-time or close on it?”

“My dear Inspector, you are a little elementary. I have no doubt the Boots told
you that he saw my shoes out in the passage. And therefore the story I have
decided to tell you is that I was already in process of going to bed when an
accident made me alter my purpose. Looking out from my window, I saw a man
turning away from the front door whom I seemed to recognise by the set of his
shoulders. Then I told myself I was a fool; something about the hat convinced
me that he was a clergyman. Then reflection told me that clergymen are not
thrown out of pubs at closing-time. And I felt convinced, I don’t know how, that
it was poor old Penistone. I wanted to see him, as you know; I threw on the rest
of my clothes hastily and went out into the street. There was no sign of him then,
of course, but I hurried down the road I supposed he would be taking; and in the
end—well, in the end I came all the way here.”
“On the off-chance of finding him still awake, late at night like that?”
“Inspector, I do not know whether you are a married man, or whether your
bosom has always been impervious to the softer emotions. But if you will ask
anyone who has been violently in love, he will tell you that a lover thinks
nothing of walking a mile or two merely to stand outside a window and
sentimentalise among the rhododendrons. That is all I would have done, if I had
not found the lights going strong in the poor old Admiral’s study.”
“You saw them as you came along?”
“Do you know, you would get much more information if you didn’t try to
catch a fellow out all the time. Of course, I didn’t see them from the road. I had
come round into the lawn, and saw them from there. I went up and knocked, and
the Admiral let me in through the french window. He told me I had come just in
time, ‘quite dramatic,’ he said—he was in the act of making out for his niece the
document we had been waiting for these weeks past, his consent to our marriage.
And, sure enough, it was on the table when we came into the drawing-room.”
“That would be—about a quarter past twelve, you say?”
“I didn’t notice the time exactly. But I had started from the Lord Marshall
soon after eleven, which is closing-time. I walked slowly after I had got out of
Whynmouth, so I can’t have been here till twelve or so; that’s how I worked it
out.”
“Yes, I see. Now, was it your impression that Admiral Penistone was just
meaning to turn in when you came? Was he in his dressing-gown, for example?
Was he smoking, or drinking a whisky and soda or anything? You see what I
mean, sir—I want to find out if he went outside after you had left, and if so,
why.”
“Well, I can’t help you much there. He had a pipe in his mouth part of the
time, to be sure. The only thing which made me feel he had not thought of bed-

time yet was the litter on that desk; papers lying there, you know, taken out of
their pigeon-holes. The Admiral wasn’t the kind of man to go to bed without
putting his papers to bed first.”
“Ah, that’s very interesting. And you haven’t any idea, I suppose, what
papers?”
“Not the least, I’m afraid. I dare say in your job you sometimes have to look
over a man’s shoulder to see what he is reading, but we have a stricter code in
the jute trade.”
Rudge felt the offensiveness of the reflection, but he achieved a passable
smile. “You didn’t stay long, then? Just thanked him, maybe, and said you’d be
getting back to Whynmouth?”
“Hardly more than that. He let me out at the french window again, and I went
back to the Lord Marshall in that frame of mind in which a man finds himself,
my dear Inspector, when he realises that the greatest dream of his life has come
true. That is to say, walking on air, and not noticing much that went on round
me.”
“Not even how you unlocked the front door of the hotel?”
“Why, I am afraid I had taken my precautions about that. I knew that Boots is
fond of going to bed as early as he can, and does not like to have his sleep
disturbed. So I was careful to leave the back-yard door on the latch—you will
find that it has no bolts on it—and Mrs. Davis, I am afraid, was none the wiser. I
thought best not; she talks.”
“You’re right there, sir. All the same, I wish you had been a little less quiet in
your comings and goings; they’ll put you through it properly at the inquest. But,
of course, you’d leave your boots outside the door, so we’ll have evidence that
you were in before the front door was opened?”
“My dear Inspector, you think of everything. You want me to say that I was
wearing, at a quarter-past eleven on the way to Rundel Croft, the same pair of
boots which were outside my door at half-past. Believe me, your technique is
improving. But the sad truth is that when I got up and followed my phantom
Admiral, I put on another pair—suède shoes, which one does not have cleaned,
if one is wise, at the Lord Marshall.”
“Ah, that explains it. I suppose you did not by any chance bring a copy of the
Evening Gazette with you to Rundel Croft?”
“I never read it. Its politics nauseate me.”
Rudge held his notebook at arm’s length, as if studying an artistic effect.
“Well, that gives a clear account of your movements, Mr. Holland. Now, there
are one or two questions I would like to ask; but, as they don’t bear directly on
what happened last night, I shan’t be surprised if you won’t tell me. The first is

just this: Why was it that Admiral Penistone at first didn’t want to see you marry
his niece, and then changed his mind?”
“I think you must be very busy looking for mysteries if you make a mystery
out of that. If you come to think of it, I have only known the family a matter of
three or four weeks. I first met my wife, since you are kind enough to be so
interested in our private affairs, at Sir Wilfrid Denny’s, just after she came here;
and it was love at first sight with both of us. The Admiral—well, he was a man
of circumspection, and he wanted to see more of me, I suppose. When his niece
wrote telling me to come down to Whynmouth again, because she had good
news for me, I only just dared to hope it was this. (That was when I got the
licence.) But it seems my respectability was more self-evident to him than it is to
you.”
“Oh, come now, no offence taken, I hope. And then there’s this second
question, which sounds impolite, but I must ask it. Why were you in such a hurry
to get married, Mr. Holland?”
Holland paused this time quite unmistakably; but his face did not suggest guilt
or duplicity; he looked more like an honest man who knows more than he is at
liberty to tell, and is not quite sure how much he can tell without a breach of
trust. That, at least, is how Rudge read his expression for the moment or two
while the embarrassment lasted. Then: “Inspector,” said Holland, with a more
serious note in his voice, “you mustn’t ask me to be responsible for a woman’s
fancies. I know you think it was very shocking to go and get married like that;
very quietly owing to mourning in the bride’s family, funeral bake-meats
scarcely cold, and so on. But, well, I think the truth is Elma is far more nervous
than her self-command lets you see. I think she was altogether rattled by what
happened here that night, and she felt she was in danger here; who could tell she
would not be the next victim of this mysterious vendetta, or whatever it was?
She wanted to get away from the place, and she wanted to have a man close to
her, now that her uncle was gone, who would have a natural right to be her
protector. There’s that about me, you see; I may not be worthy of Elma, but I’ve
got the right format for a chucker-out. And I suppose that’s how she looked at
it.”
“Yes, I see that. Now, may I ask you this?—did Admiral Penistone himself,
when you last saw him, give you any idea of what had made him change his
mind? Did he explain at all?”
“If you’d known him, you’d know that he wasn’t a man for explaining things.
He was short and sharp in conversation—hated to waste a word. And that night,
why, he hardly said more than ‘Good evening,’ and ‘Come this way, I’ve
something to show you,’ and ‘There, will that make you any happier?’

Otherwise he just puffed at his pipe; that was his idea of conversation.”
“Ah, he was a great smoker, was he? Always the same pipe, I’ll be bound;
your true smoker never uses more than one.”
“He wasn’t, then. Why, you can see for yourself how they’re scattered over
the mantelpiece. If one wouldn’t draw, he’d take to another.”
“I wonder—do you think it possible that he had anything on his mind, and that
was why he said so little? Of course, I’m anxious to find out whether the
unfortunate gentleman knew at all what was coming to him. Did he look worried
or tired, for example, when you saw him?”
“Not that I noticed. No, not that I noticed. Of course, when I saw him in the
study the only lamp burning was that reading lamp just beside you, which has a
thick, green shade over it, as you see; you don’t see much of a man’s face when
he is standing up and the light is all being thrown on his desk. But if you ask me
whether his tone of voice suggested excitement or worry, I’d say, No.”
“Well, Mr. Holland, I think I’ve asked you all that I wanted. Oh, except this—
he wasn’t wearing an overcoat, was he, by any chance?”
“In his study? On a hot summer night? You might as well ask whether he was
wearing chain armour.”
“I know it sounds unlikely, sir. But there it is—he was in a greatcoat when he
was found. And of course … by the way, Mr. Holland, when you thought you
saw the Admiral outside your window, would he be wearing a greatcoat then?”
“Now, what a fool one is about noticing things! I see him as in a greatcoat
now; but then, I know about the body … I feel as if he hadn’t had a greatcoat on;
but then, I may be arguing with myself; I may be saying to myself that I must
have noticed it if it had been worn, on a hot night like that. If only my memory
worked by eye! No, Inspector, you may put me in jug, but I should be
misleading you if I tried to give you a plain answer to a plain question.”
“Well, thank you for what you have told me, sir. Now, about Mrs. Holland
…”
“If you ask me, I expect Mrs. Holland will want her dinner. It doesn’t seem to
occur to you that you’re rather spoiling our honeymoon. Look here, we’ve
booked rooms at the Lord Marshall. Elma said she couldn’t sleep in this house
just yet. I don’t dare to think what Mrs. Davis’s dinner must be like when it gets
cold. Can’t you leave it till to-morrow and put my wife on the rack then?”
“Well, sir, it’s like this. I’ve got to see the coroner to-morrow morning, and
I’ve got to give him as full an account of the case as I can; and you and Mrs.
Holland, look at it whatever way you will, are going to be important witnesses.
But if you think Mrs. Holland would sooner see me first thing to-morrow, why,
there’s a policeman on duty in the Square, and if I may pass the word to him, I’ll

feel certain I know where to find you. Perhaps if I was to climb up behind, you
wouldn’t mind giving me a lift as far as Whynmouth?”
“For fear we might be tempted to take a wrong turning? Well, Inspector, I
suppose we’ve deserved that. All right, come on; we’ll play fair this time.”
Rudge sat in darkness at the back of the car, instinctively spying on the two
figures whose outlines were blurred against the illuminated patch of road. The
impressions he had already formed of the couple were on the whole confirmed;
there was little talk between them, and when there was any the initiative seemed
to come from Holland; you saw, in the attentive droop of his shoulder sideways,
the model of the deferential lover, whereas Elma looked straight in front of her
and hardly moved when she answered. But then, she was tired, no doubt; she had
much to think of; perhaps she even felt sorrow for the old man whose fortunes
she had shared for so many years, now lying under that dust-sheet in the
mortuary.
Rudge made an excuse to follow them into the hotel; he was privately
concerned to make sure about the locking of that door into the back-yard. The
Lord Marshall is an old-fashioned hotel, and there is no private entrance for
visitors; they have to pass along a narrow passage, with a slight recess in the
middle of it which gives you a back view of the gentlemen who are refreshing
themselves at the public bar. One of these made a half-turn as they entered, and
Rudge had two simultaneous impressions—that he recognised the man, and that
the man did not want to be recognised. At least, he shrank back as they
approached, and his face was hidden in the darkness of the space under the
stairway. Returning from a mercifully brief interview with Mrs. Davis, Rudge
found him again and verified his guess. It was Cropped-head, the Gazette
reporter. By a promise of seeing him next day, Rudge managed to stave off his
eager questionings about the progress of the case. Then he had a word with the
policeman in the Square, and went back to the seclusion of his own rooms.
Inspector Rudge, we must regretfully admit, was a quite ordinary man. He did
not solace himself with the violin, or the cocaine-bottle; he did not tie knots in
string, or collect scarabs, or distinguish himself in any way by sidelines. The
rooms to which he returned were quite ordinary rooms, from which he had not
even troubled to remove the landlady’s decorations; the whisky he took out of
the cupboard was so well known that the mention of its name would be an
unnecessary advertisement; the same may be said of the tobacco with which he
filled his pipe. If the full truth must be confessed, Inspector Rudge was so far
human that he took off his boots and replaced them with a pair of dressingslippers. Then he got down to the night’s work; and that consisted in selecting
from the mass of material he had accumulated during the day the points that

seemed most likely to repay investigation. These points he jotted down, in the
form of questions; he added no written comment, except an occasional
memorandum; but as each question was reduced to verbal shape he looked up at
the ceiling and let his mind play around the possibilities which it suggested. The
questions are here reproduced, with a summary of the cogitations to which each
one led. When he counted them up, his orthodox mind was delighted to find
them exactly thirty-nine in number.

1. Why did Penistone come to Lingham, and why did Sir Wilfrid mind?
Altogether, there was too much of the China Station about this business. On the
face of it, there was nothing particularly improbable in the fact that two men
well acquainted with China should be living at such close range. But Mrs. Davis,
representing the local gossip, had seen some significance in it; and, quite
unexpectedly, she had volunteered the information that Sir Wilfrid did not seem
over-pleased at the neighbourhood. Was it conceivable that there had been a
connection between them in the past? A guilty connection? If so, on which side
did the guilt lie? On Sir Wilfrid’s surely. Rudge’s mind, do what he would, was
apt to travel in official grooves; and the notion of blackmail forced itself on him.
The more so, because Sir Wilfrid appeared to be in straitened circumstances.
Mem.—Apply to the bank in the hope of getting the Admiral’s passbook; hardly
possible to have the handling of Sir Wilfrid’s.
2. Why did Jennie think that Penistone and Elma seemed more like husband
and wife than uncle and niece? Probably mere gossip. Jennie had, after all, seen
the couple but a short time; the fact that they managed the household—
presumably—in financial partnership would give them, to the girl’s mind, the air
of equals. Once again Rudge’s fancy toyed with the idea of an impersonation;
yet it seemed quite impossible that any such impersonation should long persist;
Dakers would see through it if nobody else did.
3. Why was Elma so familiar with the French maid? And why did the French
maid leave so suddenly? The two questions could be treated as one; if there was
any significance in the former it would probably provide an explanation for the
other. The allegation that Célie had found the place dull was surely a mere
excuse; a Frenchwoman who had stood years of Cornish exile would necessarily
take more than a week to grow tired of Lingham; Whynmouth, after all, boasted
a picture-palace. It might, of course, be some romance or tragedy below stairs
which happened to have come to a head at the moment. But it seemed more
natural to assume that the move was the cause of the flight—yes, you might
almost call it a flight, since there was money owing. Of course, if Célie were not

a mere servant, it might be that money was no object to her. But why leave just
after a move? Surely it would have been more plausible to give notice when the
move took effect. And that meant—that ought to mean that Célie, on coming to
Lingham, had found something there which was unexpectedly disconcerting to
her; or that circumstances arose at Lingham which would not have arisen in
Cornwall. Too short a time for romance. Had Célie been in Lingham before?
Mem.—Trace, if possible, Célie’s present whereabouts and past references.
4. Why, again on Jennie’s testimony, was so little love lost between Elma and
Holland, on her side at any rate? Once more, it might be mere gossip. Who was
it who was credited with a “miserably low standard of intoxication”? Perhaps
Jennie had an unusually high standard of walking-out. Jennie peered at you; and
a couple of shy lovers might have been at pains to disengage their hands at the
warning of her heavy-footed entrance. But if there was anything to it, it
suggested that the marriage, on one side at least, was a mariage de convenance.
On which side? Hers, according to the evidence; and, to be sure, she had had an
earlier disappointment; her youth was slipping from her. It might be, too, that
she was anxious to deal with her capital, instead of having the interest doled out
to her by trustees. But where was the need here? She lived simply; she dressed
dowdily. Holland, of course, might be an adventurer; but, if so, he was a clever
feigner of love.
5. What did Elma do with her money? This question arose naturally out of the
last. How simple life would be for the police, if we all audited our accounts, like
the public charities! Rundel Croft was not a house of pretensions; its grounds
were negligible. Even if Elma paid more than a half-share—and the Admiral
must have had some money—it was hard to believe that £1,200 a year could be
needed for upkeep. Yet the capital was hers; there was no obvious need of
saving. Once again the word blackmail suggested itself; but this time it seemed
to be the wrong way about. If Sir Wilfrid were the blackmailer, why did his
victims settle so close? And why did he manifest annoyance? Mem.—Once
more, consult the Admiral’s passbook.
6. What part did Walter play in the background of these lives? If he was dead,
then his influence only persisted in so far as he was keeping Elma out of half of
her inheritance; and this, in view of her already comfortable circumstances,
seemed a factor that could be neglected. But if he were alive—what would be his
influence then? Was he popular with his family, or had the story of his disgrace
obliterated all affection? It was odd, when you came to think of it, that a
household so connected with a soldier who disappeared in the War should have
no photograph of him exposed in study or drawing-room. And yet—there was
the scandal of the cheque; awkward, perhaps, to have visitors saying “Who’s

that?” If he were alive, what was he doing; what would he be doing? It seemed
unlikely that a man of his antecedents would let a fortune pass him by without a
struggle. Yet, granted he were alive and were attempting to reinstate himself,
what could he stand to gain by committing a crime of this sort, or inducing
others to commit it? “Point is, disappearance of valuable uncle,” Rudge found
himself quoting. The corpse of one trustee does not make a legacy.
7. Why did Ware think the Admiral had altered since he last saw him? People
do change their looks, of course, and a man labouring under a long grievance
may be excused for losing something of his old cheerfulness and vitality. But the
photographs at Rundel Croft, evidently dating back to the period of Ware’s
reminiscences, bore a quite unmistakable resemblance to the man found
drowned. Again the wild suggestion of an impersonation flooded across the
Inspector’s mind; again common sense told him that a long-sustained
impersonation is a practical impossibility. Was it conceivable that Ware did
recognise the corpse he fished out; then, for some reason, pretended not to; then,
by way of explaining his lapse of memory, invented this story of altered looks?
But again, why should Ware pretend ignorance? Why not have said, “I’ve seen
the man before somewhere, but I can’t remember the circumstances”? Mem:—
Ask Dakers about this.
8. Does Mrs. Davis’s allusion to a runaway wife at the Vicarage lead
anywhere? It seemed a long shot; but so far, apart from Elma, there was no
woman in the case except the woman in the car, untraced, and this phantom from
Lingham’s past, who might surely be expected to give the place a wide berth. It
has been suggested that Rudge’s mind ran obstinately in grooves of police
experience; and cherchez la femme is almost the first item in the policeman’s
decalogue. But how to make enquiries about Mrs. Mount’s history since her
elopement? The Vicar could supply the name of his guilty rival, but it would be
brutality to ask him; and even so the traces of a ten-years-old disappearance
would almost certainly have been obliterated by now. No, Rudge decided, he
was becoming fantastic. Mrs. Mount had never lived at Lingham; presumably
her husband had never heard the names of Denny or Penistone at the time of her
desertion. There was not even a loose thread to be picked up here.
Rudge drew a line across this page. So far, his questions were all questions
which might have been asked, though there would have been no reason for the
police to ask them, yesterday afternoon, when the river ran peacefully between
the Vicarage and Rundel Croft, the two boys sporting in it with no shadow of a
tragedy to overawe their high spirits; when the Admiral’s brisk walk and sharp
voice proclaimed him very much alive, and no pale corpse rested in the
Whynmouth mortuary. Now he must get on to the crime itself; its circumstances

and the traces it had left. He hitched his chair up a little closer to the table, took a
meditative pull out of his glass, emptied out and refilled his pipe, then returned
methodically to his self-imposed catechism.
9. Why did Elma dress up that night to meet the Vicar? Here again you were
dealing with impressions, the impressions of a rather fanciful servant-girl. But
one must not despise the testimony of the expert; and a lady’s maid, in the little
world of her own limited interests, is an observant critic. Any deviation from the
normal, however slight, is worth watching as a possible hint that crime did not
come altogether like a bolt from the blue; that somebody was up to something
beforehand. But in this case who was up to what? If Elma thought she was going
to meet Holland that night, odd that it should have been her uncle, not she, who
was in a hurry to get back to Rundel Croft. And if a meeting was projected, it
was evidently a secret one; no need, then, to draw attention to it by tricking
herself out for the occasion. On the other hand, Mr. Mount seemed hardly the
man to appreciate a lady’s costume; hardly the man whom the most enterprising
of adventuresses would have set out to vamp. Old English sports, No. 82,
Vamping the Vicar. Was it conceivable that Elma was up to some game which
involved leaving Rundel Croft later that night; that she meant to change her
clothes for the purpose, and was at pains to put on elaborate evening dress so as
to make the later change a more effective disguise? Mem.—Ask Jennie if any
other wardrobe items showed signs of disturbance or hasty folding this morning.
10. Why did she hide the dress afterwards? At least, that was going a little too
fast. But she had certainly made a point of packing the dress, and of packing it
herself. The conclusion, though not irresistible, was certainly probable, that there
was something about that dress which she did not want even a confidential eye
to discover. But that meant, unless she was going to tell a quite different story
under to-morrow’s cross-examination, that Elma had something to conceal, and
was giving a false account of her movements. If, after leaving the boat-house,
she went straight to bed, it was impossible that any telltale evidence—a split or a
stain—should have made its appearance since her good night to the Admiral.
The trouble was that since Elma had moved to the Lord Marshall, Jennie was no
longer in a position to report. Mem.—If there is a chambermaid at the inn who
doesn’t talk, ask her to find out whether that dress ever came back from London.
11. Was it Penistone who went down to Whynmouth that night? The evidence
came from two sources; both were uncertain, one quite possibly mendacious.
Rudge had satisfied himself that the lighting outside the Lord Marshall was
particularly inadequate. The direct statement made to the Boots, who could
hardly be lying, showed that the man who called at the door was either the
Admiral or an impostor who was impersonating him. If Holland’s account were

true, it confirmed the notion that some deliberate attempt had been made at
disguise; Holland did not overhear the visitor’s conversation, and yet thought
there was a look of the Admiral about him. But then, was Holland telling the
truth? Assume that it was the Admiral; why did he suddenly want to take that
late (and bad) train up to London? In the alternative, why did he want to create
the impression that he had intended doing so? Either supposition implied that
there was some mysterious dealing on the Admiral’s own part, which no other
evidence, except perhaps his impatience to get away from the Vicarage,
suggested. Assume that it was not the Admiral; then what was the point of this
elaborate frame-up? To implicate Holland in the crime? But there was no
foretelling that Holland would not remain fast asleep at the Lord Marshall;
nothing but his own evidence served to connect him with the mysterious caller.
To deceive the public about the spot at which the murder was committed? Yes,
there was something in that; it might help out an alibi. But would not the bogus
Admiral have been at pains to leave other evidence of his visit, besides that of a
sleepy and stupid hotel servant?
12. If it was the Admiral, did he travel by road or by river? According to the
Vicar’s evidence, which must be genuine since it could be checked, the Admiral
had a game leg, and did not walk if he could help it. It seemed unlikely that he
could have taken out the car without waking some of the household. The boat
remained as a possibility; and if the Admiral went secretly down the river in a
boat, where was he going to put it when he took the London train? Abandoned, it
would invite theft; moored among other boats it would bear testimony to his
movements. It was hardly to be supposed that he meant to leave Whynmouth for
ever. The suggestion seemed to be that all this talk about the train was a blind.
Once again, for what purpose? The only thing which seemed certain was that the
Admiral’s boat had been taken from its moorings that night, and had been
restored to the boat-house by somebody who was not the Admiral.
13. Why did the visitor, whoever it was, ask for Holland and then refuse to see
him? If it was a bogus Admiral, the answer was not in doubt; the man had asked
for Holland so as to get an excuse for mentioning the Admiral’s name; possibly
also to implicate Holland in the trouble which was to follow. He did not actually
meet Holland, for fear of detection. If it was the real Admiral, a motive was
harder to assign. His behaviour seemed that of a man who wants to make sure
that a hotel guest has really arrived, or that he is really in the hotel, and yet does
not trouble to conceal those inquisitorial methods from the person against whom
they are directed. If Holland’s story were true, the Admiral might have
contemplated a real visit, so as to reassure him about the consent. But why, after
taking so much trouble, should he go away without leaving any significant

message?
14. Did Holland really see anybody in the street? Answer: Yes, and it means
that Holland’s story is true up to a point; he really was in the Lord Marshall, or
near it, as late as closing time. But there was that hesitation about the greatcoat;
was that genuine? Or was the ignorance affected, to avoid possible traps?
Answer: No, and it means that Holland still possesses knowledge which he is
concealing. Either he knew that the Admiral intended to make that visit, or he
was privy to the plans of the fellow who impersonated the Admiral. In either
case, his mention of the visitor would be an attempt to prove that he was really
in the hotel at closing time; this smelt of an alibi.
15. Did Holland really go to Rundel Croft that night? Against the story was
its extreme vagueness; the absence of clear motive, the care he took to explain
why no witnesses of his journey were likely to be forthcoming, his selection of a
fresh pair of shoes, the alleged secrecy of his exits and entrances. On the other
hand, if Holland was lying, it was hard to suppose that he was lying to screen
himself; bed was his best alibi. The evidence of the Boots and Mrs. Davis would
be a difficult defence for the police to get over, without some positive clue to
implicate Holland—and no such clue existed. Instead of sticking to his first
story, that he had slept soundly in his bed, he had gone out of his way to confess
himself a liar, had told a story, fantastic in many points, about a visit to Rundel
Croft which no witness could attest, and in doing so had deliberately claimed the
position of the last man who had seen Penistone alive. He seemed to be running
his head deliberately into a noose; why should he do that, unless to divert
suspicion from the real criminal? And that meant … yes, it would hang together.
He had told the truth this morning; since then, fresh knowledge had come to him
which induced him to put a halter round his own neck. But then, was Holland
lying? Would he not, by now, have contrived to make up a more plausible story,
accounting for his presence at Rundel Croft?
16. If he went, did he go by appointment? Such an appointment might have
been made either with the Admiral himself or, more probably, with Elma. If the
former were true, nothing could bring the charge home except some record of a
message; if it was brought by note, somebody had brought the note; if it was sent
by telephone, the call could probably be traced. Also, to be sure, a message sent
by telephone to an hotel meant that the receiver would be lifted off by an hotel
servant, and the circumstance, at that hour of the night, would probably be
remembered. When you came to think of it, the message (if there was one) must
have come from Elma, or Holland must have supposed that it came from Elma.
Otherwise, he would have had no reason to conceal it; and he could have made
his own story much more plausible by admitting it. Mem.—See Mrs. Davis about

the message: enquire if necessary at the telephone exchange.
17. Who was the woman who went through Lingham at a quarter to eleven?
At least, that was really the wrong way to put it; you could hardly hope to know
who she was, at this stage. But it was worth considering whether her arrival
could have had any influence on the situation. Her car, which might or might not
have contained another occupant, would reach Whynmouth in time to deposit the
mysterious visitor at the Lord Marshall. Alternatively, it would have been
possible for the occupants of such a car to be at Rundel Croft in time for the
murder, even if you dated the murder early. They might have gone round by
Fernton Bridge, the enquiry for the Vicarage being merely a blind; or they might
have stopped close to the Vicarage, and ferried themselves across by making
free with Mr. Mount’s boat. This last plan would have the effect of bringing the
Vicarage boat on to the scene of action; a point deserving to be considered, from
the detective’s point of view. But Rudge found himself instinctively recoiling
from such an explanation. For it would mean that the criminal or criminals came
and went by car, their base presumably London. It was not possible for the
Whynmouth police to search for suspicious characters in London; Scotland Yard
might have to be invoked, and that always meant that the credit went to Scotland
Yard.
At this point the Inspector drew a fresh line across his page. He had reached
the end of the enquiries which were antecedent, or seemed at first sight
antecedent, to the murder itself. It was time now to come on to a fresh set of
problems: those created by the circumstances in which the corpse was
discovered. The pipe needed to be re-lit; and, for that matter, another tot seemed
indicated; the indication was allowed to have full weight. Now for the facts.
Human testimony was a slippery and uncertain thing to deal with; what you were
told was a photograph fogged, as it were, by the shadow of the man who told it
you. But Nature did not lie; tides ran, dew formed, blood flowed, doors opened
and shut, on uniform and ascertainable principles. The clues pointed you on to
the actions which had produced them, and then hinted entrancingly at the
motives which lay behind the actions. Well, then …
18. Here is a man murdered; who had a motive, and what motive, for
murdering him? Ordinarily, one would expect a local quarrel; though the knife,
as Mrs. Davis acutely noticed, is not the English criminal’s weapon. But a
month’s residence hardly gave time for any supposition of the kind here. A
Cornish enemy would have found it difficult to track his man down, would have
delayed longer to ascertain the lie of the land. The quarrel, then, which found its
satisfaction in that grisly wound, must be a quarrel dating from past history in
the Admiral’s life. Further, you could assume with some certainty that the

murderer either knew the habits, or possessed the confidence, of his victim. A
man is found murdered in the Vicar’s boat on the very night when he has been
dining at the Vicarage; in his pocket is a copy of that very newspaper to which
he is in fact a subscriber; the murder is somehow connected with a visit, alleged
or real, to a neighbouring hotel where an acquaintance of the victim is in fact
staying. All this betrays a knowledge of relevant circumstances; the mysterious
Chinaman of the story-books can be ruled out of the list of suspects; he would
not have committed the murder just so. That narrowed down the search to people
who knew something about the Admiral. Who did? His neighbours: Neddy Ware
(not much), the Vicar, the Vicar’s sons, Sir Wilfrid Denny, still an unknown
quantity. His servants: but they had given, so far, no ground for suspicion. His
family and those concerned with its fortunes: Elma, the problematical Walter,
Holland, Mr. Dakers. Of these, which had a motive—a strong one? Elma had a
weak one, the desire to get her money absolutely. Holland had a stronger one, to
overcome an obstacle to his marriage; but was it strong enough? Not unless and
until it could be proved that the typewritten consent was a forgery. Mr. Dakers
hardly came into the picture at all; Walter, if he was alive, was a tough customer
no doubt; but how exactly did he stand to gain by his uncle’s disappearance?
This absence of motive was a puzzling feature; was it possible that some guest of
Sir Wilfrid Denny’s was implicated? Mem.—Trace Denny as soon as possible.
19. Why was a knife chosen as the weapon? Stabbing usually meant murder in
hot blood, or as the result of panic; a thought-out crime would ordinarily depend
on safer weapons. Its use suggested that the murder took place at some spot
where the report of fire-arms would have been heard, and would have brought
rescue; near the house, for instance. Grice had been away all day, and had as yet
made no investigation of the wound since the loss of the Norwegian knife had
been discovered. If that knife seemed likely to be the weapon, it would look as if
the criminal’s first plans had not involved murder, or, at least, murder done in
that way.
20. Why was the body found in a boat? No use to suggest that the murder had
been done in the boat, and the body, from fear or disgust, left where it lay. In the
first place, it is very hard to murder a man in a boat; you must be in it yourself,
and that means looking at one another all the time—no chance for a sudden
attack. And in this case the blood must have flowed, yet there were no marks on
the white paint. The body, then, had been deliberately put into the boat; why?
For convenience of colportage? That was possible; but granted that your corpse
has got to make a journey by boat, it does not follow that it is best left there.
Suppose it had been thrown overboard, with a couple of stones tied to it? The
Admiral’s disappearance would have caused alarm at first; but a report from the

Lord Marshall that he had been seen in Whynmouth that night, just en route for
the late train would have dissipated the rumour of murder until the river gave up
its dead; and by that time the murderer might be anywhere—China, for example.
The murderer’s instinct is always to hide his victim, at least for the moment; this
murderer had deliberately put the corpse on show, with the certainty of its
discovery next morning. What did that mean? It suggested, at least, that the
whole circumstances in which the corpse was found were a deliberate frame-up;
the criminal felt certain that suspicion would not fall on him, so long as he left
evidence which would fasten the suspicion on other people. Granted that frame
of mind, you could just account for the boat. A boat travels with the stream or
with the tide at a more or less uniform pace; a floating body, by itself, might get
held up by any overhanging branch, any patch of shallows. It might be that the
criminal wanted to suggest, by the position in which the body was found, that the
murder had taken place at a different hour or at a different spot from the actual
hour, the actual spot. Best to ask Neddy Ware to say exactly what combinations
of times and places would have brought the boat to the spot at which he found it,
e.g., Whynmouth, Fernton Bridge, the Vicarage, as alternative sites; 10.30,
11.30, 12.30 as alternative times. Mem.—Look up Neddy Ware again.
21. Why was the body found in that particular boat? An easy answer
suggested itself, “To throw suspicion on the Vicar” for which reason, too, the hat
was doubtless thrown in. To suppose that the Vicar, if he were really privy to the
murder, would allow his connection with it to be thus blatantly advertised was
ridiculous. But then, was it not almost equally ridiculous to suppose that the
criminal had chosen the Vicar as his scapegoat? The frame-up, in that case, was
inconceivably clumsy work. The simple bluff of pretending that the Vicar was
the criminal seemed too simple; the double bluff of pretending to have pretended
that the Vicar was the criminal seemed too complicated. Yet, for what other
purpose could the Vicarage boat have been dragged into the story at all? It might
indicate that the murderer had started from the other side of the river, and had
found that a borrowed boat saved the trouble of going round by the bridge. On
the other hand, it might indicate that the murderer had wanted the police to think
just that, having in fact started his operations from the Rundel Croft bank. There
was not much to be made of this clue, and yet it haunted the imagination.
22. Why was the Vicar’s hat left behind? Assuming for the moment that
Mount was the criminal, the question admitted of no ready answer. On the
whole, people are hat-wearers or bare-headers; the former class will notice the
absence of the familiar feeling as a kind of discomfort. You would expect the
murderer, passing his hand over his forehead, to cry out instinctively, “Good
heavens, where is my hat?” An unconscious exchange of hats between the

murderer and his victim seemed just possible; Holland had fancied a clerical
appearance about the hat which the Admiral, if it was the Admiral, had worn that
night. Again, assuming that the murderer came from the direction of the
Vicarage, it was possible that he had found the hat lying derelict in the summerhouse, and had borrowed it for his own purpose—to hide his face, for example.
Mem.—Examine the hat on the off-chance of finding lay hairs adhering to it.
23. Why was the key to the french window found in the bottom of the
Admiral’s boat? This key business was less puzzling. Presumably, when Elma
left her uncle to lock up the boat, she took the key up with her, and left it in the
french window, on the outside, so that he could let himself in later. Did he so let
himself in? It looked as if he must have, to find his greatcoat. Then, if he ever
went out again alive, he would lock the window from the outside and slip the
key into his pocket. It might fall out of his pocket, easily enough, when his dead
body was put into the boat. Alternatively, if the Admiral was in fact killed in his
garden before he had time to re-enter the house, the criminal would no doubt use
the key to let himself in, when he was in search of the hidden papers. Once he
had got those papers, and the Admiral was dead, it did not matter what he did
with the key; indeed, it was necessary to get rid of it somehow.
24. Why was the Admiral’s boat moored, contrary to custom, by the bows?
Here was a point of genuine significance. It meant that this boat, too, had figured
somehow in the movements of that August night. Either the Admiral had been
abroad on her, and had been caught in the middle of his travels; or else the
criminal, having despatched him in his own garden, had made use of two boats
in disposing of the body, or possibly in securing his own escape. And for some
reason, a baffling one, surely, he had thought it more important to leave the
Admiral’s boat moored than the Vicar’s. Inexplicably, he must have thought that
things looked more natural this way. Another pertinent consideration arose:
Elma must surely have known her uncle’s little fad about the mooring of boats;
and therefore if she or anybody acting under her immediate direction had been
guilty of the murder, it was hard to believe that the boat would not have been
found in the morning moored as usual.
25. Why is a whole length of the painter missing? And such a small length; not
as much as you would naturally cut off if you needed the rope for some unusual
purpose; to tie a man’s hands, for example. No, the Vicar’s boat had first been
cut loose from its moorings, and then it had been tied up again, either to some
other post or to some other boat, and once more it had been necessary to cut it
with a knife instead of untying it. This was puzzling, because ordinarily what
man has done man can undo, if it is the same man. You had to allow for
accident; e.g., two ropes might have been tied together, and then swelled through

being left in the water; or some sudden need for haste might have arisen, so that
there was no leisure for untying knots. But following out the indications of the
painter for what they were worth, you were led to the conclusion that the painter
had been twice cut; that a different person had been responsible for the second
cut, and that this new person was shorter than the other. The Vicar, for example,
who was tallish, might have cut the rope in the first instance; but if it was he who
re-tied the boat, he would naturally do so at a height which would make it
possible for him to untie it again without difficulty. This new figure in the story
might be called x-n, the original painter cutter being labelled x. Now, it was
possible that x-n was simply the Admiral. But the question arose whether you
had not to allow for two people besides the Admiral, both concerned in the
doings of that night, x and x-n. Holland might be x, but such was his height that
he might have been expected to untie the boat even from its first moorings.
26. Why was the body found in a coat? It was a pity, when you came to think
of it, that that question had not been put down immediately after No. 20. It
would have been a rhyme. Rudge, in his youth, had tried to fill up the last lines
of limericks, but he had never claimed to be a poet, and it was a new experience
for him to find himself in the position of the young Ovid, writing verse
unconsciously. Yes, to be sure, that greatcoat. If the Admiral really went into
Whynmouth, and really meant to catch the late train, it was conceivable that he
would have taken a coat with him to protect him against the chill of the early
morning. But Rudge was altogether inclined to discredit that projected railway
journey. If the Admiral really went to Whynmouth, or to any other point along
the river, in a boat and with the intention of returning in a boat, he would only
have encumbered himself with a fairly substantial overcoat for one reason—he
must have anticipated having to hang about somewhere waiting for somebody,
talking to somebody, in the open air, and was afraid that he would get a chill
after taking exercise without this precaution. On the other hand, the greatcoat
was a loose one; what they call in the shops “something in the style of a
Raglan.” It would have been quite possible, then, for the murderer, unless he
were squeamish about handling corpses, to pull the overcoat on to a dead body
in a perfectly convincing way. Now, what would that mean? Probably, that the
murderer was elaborating a “frame-up” as before; having disseminated the idea
that the Admiral meant to go up to London by the late train, he went on to give
that idea corroboration by vesting his victim suitably for such a journey.
27. And now, why the newspaper in the pocket? If the Admiral had really
intended a train journey, and had gone into the house to get his coat with that in
view, was it not humanly certain that his eye would have fallen on the
newspaper close by, and that he would have crammed the familiar copy in his

greatcoat there and then? The train-service from Whynmouth to London is not
distinguished for speed, and most residents arm themselves with some kind of
literature before they set out on it. But this the Admiral had not done; the second
copy found in the hall the morning after the murder was the genuine article, for it
was marked “Admiral Pennystone,” with one of Mr. Tolwhistle’s characteristic
mis-spellings. Where did the unmarked copy come from? The shops and the
bookstalls at Whynmouth were all shut by nine; and there were no longer any
street vendors—Whynmouth is a sleepy place, and the last optimist who had
tried peddling alleged “late editions” had gone out of business some months
earlier. The Admiral had not gone into the Lord Marshall; could not, then, have
picked up a copy there and walked off with it. If he was really in possession of it
while still alive, it followed that he must have called somewhere else that night.
Sir Wilfrid Denny’s house suggested itself as a possibility. If, on the other hand,
the paper had been thrust into the pocket after his death by the man who
murdered him, that could only have been done with the intention of falsifying
the evidence. Falsifying it how? In point of time, by suggesting that the murder
took place, say, after nine instead of having taken place before nine? But that
would bring the real time to an impossibly early hour. In point of place, then; the
murder really happened in some place at a distance from Whynmouth; and the
murderer, by thrusting the Gazette into the dead man’s pocket, had tried to create
the impression that the murder took place at Whynmouth, or at least while the
victim was on his way back from there. Read so, this piece of evidence chimed
in with the conclusion which had already suggested itself—that the murderer
wanted it to be thought, falsely, that the Admiral was in Whynmouth that
evening. If you accepted this argument, a further consideration arose. The
murderer was somebody who did not know Whynmouth, or whose knowledge of
it was not up-to-date. A resident—the elusive Sir Wilfrid, for example—would
not have made the mistake of imagining that the Gazette was still on sale at
eleven o’clock in the evening.
28. Of what nature were the documents marked “X”? That they were secret,
that they were valuable, went without saying. What was much more remarkable,
if you came to think of it, was that any reference to “X” should have been given
among the files at all. The Admiral himself, though he was one of the few
admirals who had not publicly attested his indebtedness to any system of
memory-training, was clearly not absent-minded beyond the average of
humanity; why then should he need a reference to remind him where these allimportant documents were kept? Yet, if the references were not for the
Admiral’s own benefit, who else could profit by them? In the event of his desk
being broken open, would it not have been safer to leave the very existence of

“X,” as well as its whereabouts, a secret? It looked almost as if the Admiral had
expected the fate which ultimately came upon him—after all, there was that
loaded revolver in the desk—expected that a police officer sooner or later would
rummage in his desk, and would need a pointer to inform him that secret papers
were concealed somewhere. It would appear that Sir Wilfrid was somewhat
involved, also the nephew, Walter. It seemed probable that the background was
Chinese. Was it blackmail? If so, Sir Wilfrid must surely be the victim of it, not
Walter; you cannot threaten with exposure a man who has disappeared from
human ken.
29. Were they destroyed, or stolen? And by whom? It was just possible that
Penistone at some time had got rid of documents which would be damaging to
himself or to someone he cared for. It was more natural to assume that the
murderer was also a thief. But—here was an important point—the person who
stole those papers must, almost necessarily, have been an inmate of the house;
the desk had shown no traces of being rifled, there were no marks of violence
about the secret drawer. If, then, the villain of last night had removed those
papers, he had known exactly where to look for them, and had wasted no time
over it.
Whew! There was a fresh section of the evidence concluded; that finished the
clues which dated from last night. Rudge’s left foot had gone to sleep, and he
tramped his room for a bit, trying to map out what remained of his task. Yes, he
must analyse the behaviour of the various people, against whom suspicion might
conceivably lie, since the actual discovery of the corpse. The most noticeable
feature, undoubtedly, was what you might call the drain of the rural population
—the general dash for London. Very well, then:
30. Why did Elma Fitzgerald hurry up to London? The conclusion seemed
inevitable that her flight was consequent upon the news of the murder. She was
not fond of early rising, and her early rising that morning had been Rudge’s own
fault. The Whynmouth line assumes, like most railways, that you do not want to
travel up to the metropolis much after ten o’clock; after that hour, the speed of
the trains sagged noticeably, and day tickets were no longer available.
Consequently, if you were going up to London you prepared for an early start.
Elma had made an early start, but she had not prepared for it. She had not fled to
meet Holland; for she knew, unless his overnight message had remained
undelivered, that he was in Whynmouth. She had not been to see Mr. Dakers—
though, of course, Holland’s pursuit might have interrupted that plan. Better wait
to hear what she will say to-morrow.
31. Why did Holland ditto? This was plainer sailing. Innocent or guilty, and
whether he believed her to be innocent or guilty, he would naturally want to see

Elma and to discuss the situation. But, assuming that Holland was himself
innocent, it looked as if he must have believed Elma guilty. Otherwise, he might
at least have waited to tell a true story to the police.
32. Why did Sir Wilfrid ditto? It was to be observed that Sir Wilfrid, if his
movements had been correctly reported, was in the van of the movement. He had
gone up to London “by the first train,” and that ran, when was it? Soon after
seven … anyhow, long before Elma was out of bed. Not before the body was
discovered, but surely before the rumour of its discovery was likely to have
reached him. Either, then, the “call” which summoned him had been
accompanied by news of the tragedy—and that meant Neddy Ware or the Vicar
or Rundel Croft as its source; or else he went up to London ignorant that the
murder had been committed … or at least ignorant that it had been discovered.
Well, well, it might be an accident after all; at least he must hear what the man
had to say. But what a curious influence Penistone must have had, that his death
seemed to scatter his acquaintances in alarm, instead of rallying them in
sympathy!
33. Why did the Vicar ditto? Once again, mere coincidence was possible;
Mount might, quite possibly, have gone up to chat to an archdeacon about
dilapidations. But it seemed more natural to connect his behaviour, too, with the
general upset. Now, what precise development in the story had led to the Vicar’s
Hegira? The corpse had been discovered, and he remained calm—comparatively
calm. The disappearance of Elma and Holland left him still unmoved. What new
factor could have arisen in the situation? It looked very much as if the Vicar had
made some discovery on his own, a discovery which he had not seen fit to
communicate.
34. Was the Vicar telling all he knew? Curious how people differed under
cross-examination. Elma Fitzgerald had a natural pose of hostility; she so
obviously resented being asked any questions about anything, that it was
difficult to know whether she was embarrassed at being asked these questions
about this. Holland’s contemptuous joviality was no doubt a permanent mood
with him; it made him a difficult subject for interrogation, because you never
knew quite what allowances to make for his fun. But Mr. Mount, now, he was
evidently a man anxious, as a matter of conscience, to tell the truth. But there
was a hesitation in his manner which seemed to suggest that he was not quite
sure which part of the truth to tell; not quite sure how he ought to answer one
question, for fear the next should trench on ground where he was determined not
to tread. He was scrupulous about telling the truth; and the scrupulous in this
world are apt to be more of a nuisance than the unscrupulous.
35. Why did the Vicar water his garden? It might, of course, be nothing more

than a horticultural gaffe. But, if you were prepared to make a long shot, and
suppose that the Vicar came into it somehow, you naturally asked, was he trying
to hide traces? Indulge the fancy, and where did that lead? Not his own traces,
surely; for he would be conscious of having left them, and would have had the
elementary common sense to obliterate them earlier in the day, to obliterate them
at some time when the police were unlikely to be about. The same consideration
applied, though with slightly less force, if you thought of them as the traces of
somebody of whose presence he had been conscious at the time when they were
made. And yet he must surely have had some idea whose they were and how
they came there, or his meticulous sense of justice would have induced him to
point them out to the police. A long shot, but it needed thinking over.
36. Why was the Admiral’s pipe left in the Vicar’s study? Probably because
the Admiral forgot it and left it there. He had been in a hurry, it seemed, when he
left; and the most punctilious of admirals will have these lapses occasionally.
And he was, as Holland had pointed out, a man of many pipes. But Rudge’s
brain was by now worked up into the state in which it could see significance in
everything; and even this pipe—there was the bare possibility that the Admiral
had left it there on purpose, in order to have an excuse for going back to the
Vicarage (but apparently never went); or that the Vicar himself had found it in
some place where it seemed all too likely to tell a story, and had for safety
removed it elsewhere. Rudge, perhaps with a theologian’s unconscious animus,
was already thinking of Mr. Mount as the sort of man who would not tell a direct
lie, but would be quite willing to let you deceive yourself (“lead you up the
garden” was his own less technical phrase).
37. Why were Holland and Elma in such a hurry to get married? That the
licence had already been procured before the murder took place, seemed evident.
But this in itself need not suggest foreknowledge of the murder; Holland’s own
account—that Elma had encouraged him by her letter to expect the Admiral’s
consent, and that he had taken out the licence on the strength of that hope—
seemed sound enough as it stood. You could understand why there should be
haste in their proceedings while the Admiral was still alive, and had given his
reluctant consent. Who knew when he might change his mind? But, once he was
dead, that motive ceased to operate; you would have thought it common decency
to wait a little, and according to Dakers it would have been common prudence
too. There must be some reason, but what reason? Rudge admitted that at this
point the case defied him.
38. Why did Holland conceal, at first, his alleged midnight interview? His
own excuse, that he had concealed the whole story of his midnight journey
simply to avoid embarrassing questions when he was in a hurry, seemed

strangely inadequate. On the assumption that his first story was true, and his
second false, why should he cast doubt on his own veracity by this curious volteface? On the contrary assumption, why did he not stick to his lie when once he
had told it? Having the typewritten consent in his pocket, he could just as easily
pretend it had been given to Elma early on the previous evening, before the
dinner-party; what motive was there for insisting so strongly that it had only
been drafted at midnight? It looked as if some piece of evidence must have
cropped up during the day which would make Holland’s statement that he had
slept soundly at the Lord Marshall inconsistent with the genuineness of the
typewritten consent. What could that evidence be? Rudge tortured his
imagination vainly over the problem.
39. Why was the typewritten consent typewritten? There was no typewriter in
the Admiral’s room; the documents in the files which were not holograph had
plainly been copied out by a professional. Moreover, the amateur, to whom it is
a matter of labour to fit his sheet straight into the machine, does not have
recourse to his typewriter unless he has a document of some length, say four or
five lines, to deal with. Improbable, then … unless the document was a forgery
(a signature being much easier to forge, by mere imitation, than a whole line of
writing). Or possibly the “consent” might have been extracted by some threats or
violence, in which case it was likely enough that the criminal should have
expedited matters by supplying a ready-made formula. Mem.—Ask Mrs. Holland
where and by whom she thinks the typewriting was done.

And so, having got his ideas down on paper, Rudge went off to bed,
comforting himself with the old, superstitious hope we all have sometimes, that
he would wake up with an inspiration. But the night did not bring counsel. He
did, indeed, dream that he saw the actual crime being committed. But as, in his
dream, the author of the murder was Mrs. Davis, the victim Mr. Dakers, the
weapon a rolled-up newspaper, and the scene of the whole incident the Charing
Cross Hotel, he wisely concluded that oneiromancy has its fallible moments.

CHAPTER IX
By Freeman Wills Crofts
THE VISITOR IN THE NIGHT
woke next morning with a vaguely troubled mind. He had a
subconscious impression that this was no ordinary day and that important duties
were awaiting him. Then he remembered. His big chance had come! He sprang
out of bed.
During breakfast he laid his plans for the day. First there was a conference
with his chiefs. Superintendent Hawkesworth had been on leave when the
murder took place, and though Rudge had wired for him directly he had heard of
it, he was not expected back till early that morning. The Chief Constable, Major
Twyfitt, had also been away, but he had returned last evening, and he also would
want to hear the news. Then there was the interview with the coroner about the
inquest, after which Rudge supposed he would be at liberty to take up one or
more of the lines of investigation he had thought out on the previous evening.
He was a good deal worried that he had not yet been able to arrange for an
adequate identification of the remains. Rudge did not himself doubt that the dead
man was the Admiral, but this had not been proved, and it was his job to prove
it. This question of identity would be the first to be raised by the Super, and it
would probably be the only one in which at this stage the coroner would be
interested.
Rudge walked round to the Lord Marshall on the chance that Dakers might be
about. Dakers should be his man for the identification. By a chance which Rudge
took as a good omen for the day, it happened that as he entered the porch he met
Dakers coming out.
“Good morning, sir,” Rudge said genially. “This is a bit of luck for me. I was
just wondering if I could see you.”
Dakers was polite, but not genial. He showed no enthusiasm for the meeting.
“What is it?” he asked shortly.
“The identification of the remains, sir. May I ask how long you knew the
Admiral?”
“How long?” the solicitor repeated slowly. “Let’s see. Twenty-one—two—
about twenty-two years; possibly twenty-three.”
“Good enough, sir. And during that period you’ve seen him, I presume, at
INSPECTOR RUDGE

intervals?”
“Yes, at irregular intervals, I have.”
“Then, sir, I should be obliged if when convenient you would run out with me
to Lingham, where the body is lying, and see if you can formally identify it.”
“I should like to have my breakfast first.”
“I said, sir, when convenient. Would ten o’clock suit?”
Dakers agreed and Rudge went on: “There’s another thing I’d like to ask you
about while I have the opportunity, and that is the late Admiral’s consent to his
niece’s wedding. Do you happen to have it in your possession?”
“You mean the typewritten statement?”
“Yes, sir.”
Dakers considered. “How do you come to be interested in that?” he asked.
“In the same way, sir, that I expect you’re interested in it,” Rudge returned
promptly. “We both, I take it, want to be sure that it was really given by the
Admiral.”
“You mean,” said Dakers frigidly, “that Mrs. Holland is either a liar or a
forger or both?”
“No, sir,” Rudge answered imperturbably. “Mrs. Holland didn’t say she got it
from the Admiral. Mr. Holland said that. My question is really in Mrs. Holland’s
own interest. I take it that that document will have to be proved before she can
inherit, and I was going to suggest that the sooner its authenticity is established,
the better.”
Dakers became if possible even more frigid.
“Thank you, Inspector, but I shall endeavour to look after my client’s interests
without the help of the police.”
Rudge shrugged. “As you will, sir. But you must realise that the police will
have to examine that document, and I was merely suggesting that if you could
see your way to work with us in the matter it would save time and trouble. But of
course it’s as you like. Till ten o’clock then, sir.”
Superintendent Hawkesworth was waiting for Rudge at the station, and within
a few minutes Chief Constable Twyfitt arrived. Rudge at once gave a detailed
account of what had happened and what he had done, with the steps he next
proposed to take. The two men heard him without interruption, Hawkesworth
scribbling copious notes.
“That seems all right, Rudge, as far as you have gone,” the Superintendent
said, glancing at his superior.
“Yes,” Major Twyfitt agreed. “I think Rudge has done quite well. And his
proposals for carrying on seem sound.”
“Yes, but there’s too much in them for one man,” Hawkesworth decided.

“We’ll have to divide them up. Just let’s settle what everyone’s to do and then
you, Rudge, can get along with that identification. Now let’s see.” For some
moments he scribbled rapidly. “This’ll do, I think,” he went on. “I’ll take on the
China affair. I’ll get in touch with the Admiralty and the Foreign Office and that
newspaper man and any other place or person I can think of. Then I’ll follow up
Denny: I dare say there’s some connection between the two. Sergeant Appleton
we’ll put on to Holland: Holland’s doings in this country, that is: Holland in
China will come under me. If necessary, Appleton can go up to the Yard and get
some help there. At the same time he can find out if those two were really
married in town. Constable Hempstead seems to have done well?”
“He certainly has, sir. He’s no fool, is Hempstead.”
“Very well, we’ll give him his chance. We’ll let him search the river, both
banks, over the length along which the boat could have floated. He’s to look out
for traces of any kind, particularly for footprints on the bank, signs of a struggle,
places where the body might have been lifted into the boat, and that missing bit
of the painter. That’ll keep him busy. You yourself, Rudge, take Rundel Croft
and the people in it, excluding the dead man, who I think will come into my
department. That covers things in the meantime?”
“Yes, sir, I think that’s all right.”
“Well, you get along now. Then you’re going to see the coroner? Formal
identification and an adjournment of course?”
“Of course, sir.”
Fifteen minutes later Rudge and Dakers reached the public house at Lingham
where the body of the deceased was lying. Dakers had recovered his good
temper and had chatted pleasantly enough during the drive.
“Well, sir?” Rudge asked, when the solicitor had stared for some moments at
the dead features.
Dakers seemed to awake as from a reverie. “Oh yes,” he said without
hesitation, “it’s Admiral Penistone right enough. No doubt whatever.” He
appeared somewhat touched. “Poor old fellow,” he went on, “I’m sorry to see
him like that. We didn’t see eye to eye in everything, but still—judging people
as you find them, I could say nothing but good about him.” He turned away with
a sigh. “I suppose you want me to give evidence of identity at the inquest?”
“It would save Mrs. Holland,” Rudge pointed out.
“Very well. When does it take place?”
“To-morrow at ten, sir.”
“I shall be there.”
“Thank you, sir. I suppose, sir.” Rudge smiled as if to discount the saying of a
stupid thing: “I suppose Mrs. Holland really was the late Admiral’s niece? You

see, no one here knows the family. As you are aware, they moved here about a
month ago.”
“Of course she was,” Dakers answered testily. “I’m afraid you won’t get far
on those lines, Inspector.”
“We have to question everything, sir, as you know. Well, sir, I’m obliged to
you for doing the identification. Where would you like to be put down?”
They drove back to the Lord Marshall and Dakers got out. Rudge was turning
away, but the solicitor stopped him with a gesture.
“About that consent, Inspector. I’ve been thinking over it and after all I don’t
see any reason why you shouldn’t see it. I haven’t got it myself at the moment,
but when I get it I’ll let you know.”
Rudge thanked him again and the two men parted. Rudge was pleased with his
day so far. He was certainly making progress. Already some of his theories had
been eliminated and bed-rock fact was beginning to emerge from the mass of
speculation in which the case was smothered.
Rudge’s business with the coroner was soon settled. It was obviously
impossible to complete the inquest, and Mr. Skipworth agreed that all that was
now necessary was to carry on the proceedings far enough to enable a burial
order to be given. This procedure had already been tentatively agreed on by
telephone, and the meeting was really to run over the required evidence and
make sure that no unforeseen factor had arisen.
For the rest of that day Rudge busied himself in trying to glean information
about the Rundel Croft household. He did not learn much, it must be admitted,
but he initiated a series of enquiries about each member, the replies to which,
when received, should prove valuable. Among the Admiral’s papers he found
the Cornish address from which the deceased man had moved, and he
telephoned to the Superintendent of the district for all available details of the
family. He interviewed Elma Holland, though unfortunately without much
success. He found out where the servants—the butler and his wife, and Elma’s
present maid—had been engaged, and wrote to their former employers for
further particulars of them. Lastly, he made a general search of the house, which,
however, proved quite fruitless.
At a few minutes before ten next morning Rudge entered the hall where the
inquest was to be held. To tell the truth, coroners’ enquiries were formalities
which completely bored him. A waste of time, he considered them, indeed worse
than a waste, for he believed the time could always be used more profitably in
carrying on the normal investigation.
As he had foreseen, the proceedings afforded little of interest. The eleven
jurors did not elect to view the body, and as soon as they were sworn, evidence

was taken.
Neddy Ware first told in detail of his discovery of the body. Then Mr. Dakers
swore that he had seen the body and that he identified it as that of Rear-Admiral
Hugh Lawrence Penistone. He gave a short outline of the Admiral’s life,
explained how he came to know him, and then stood down. Next Dr. Grice
stated the cause of death, a wound in the heart from a knife or dagger with a long
thin blade. A post-mortem had shown that the Admiral was in reasonably good
health for a man of his years.
This brought the proceedings to a close, the coroner stating that in order to
enable the police to make further enquiries he would adjourn the inquest till that
day three weeks.
Once again Rudge was struck by the keenness of his reporter friend from the
Evening Gazette. The man simply pestered him for news. A growing shortness in
Rudge’s manner had no effect whatever, and it was not till he threatened to give
anything available to a rival journal, that the man became reasonable.
Another person who developed a surprising curiosity was Mr. Mount. Mount
was the first man Rudge had seen on reaching the coroner’s court. This was not
surprising in a way, because Rudge had himself told the Vicar that his presence
at the inquest would be required. But owing to the decision only to take evidence
of identification that morning, Mount had neither been sent a summons to attend,
nor been officially informed of the place and hour. But there the man was, and
not only so, but he was evidently in an extremely curious as well as
apprehensive condition.
On leaving the room Rudge found himself button-holed by the Vicar. Under
the thinly veiled guise of a clergyman’s natural interest in his parishioners,
Mount made a really blatant attempt to learn the extent of the police knowledge
of the case. But Mount was a child in the Inspector’s experienced hands. Rudge
replied readily and with a convincing air of candour, while warning the Vicar not
to repeat his confidences. But Rudge knew that when the Vicar came to think
over what he had been told, he would be hard put to it to find out what those
confidences were.
Rudge wondered if he had given enough attention to Mount. Sitting down in
his room, he ran through his notes, transcribing anything he had learned about
him.
In the first place, Mount was evidently already on intimate terms with the
Rundel Croft people. Then it was in his, Mount’s, boat that the dead man had
been found, and more significant still, Mount’s hat had been in the boat. Then
there had been Mount’s sudden journey to London; there had been his watering
of the garden, and now there was this deep anxiety about the case. The more

Rudge thought over it, the more he felt impelled to the conclusion that Mount
must somehow be implicated.
Rudge considered the above points in turn, but the only one from which he
thought fresh light might be obtained was the man’s visit to London. He recalled
the details.
It was between twelve and one o’clock that Mount had sent his note saying
that he was anxious to go up that afternoon to town on an urgent matter
connected with his clerical duties. Now that must have been a very sudden
decision. He, Rudge, had been speaking to Mount earlier in the morning, and the
man had said nothing about this visit then. Rudge did not know much about
ecclesiastical matters, but he doubted that business was done at that rate. Most
professional visits to London would mean for clergymen meetings arranged a
considerable time earlier, or interviews with dignitaries, also arranged some time
beforehand. He was inclined to doubt that the clerical duties in question had
much to do with the church.
Rudge wondered what he should do. Mount bore a high reputation for probity,
and if the matter were put directly to him, he might give the required
explanation. Then Rudge saw that he would probably do nothing of the kind. He,
Rudge, had nothing to put which would demand an answer.
Mount had hurried up to town. But so had Elma, so had Holland, so had
Denny. Was it possible to believe that there was no connection between all these
visits? Suddenly it seemed to Rudge that his best plan would be to try to trace
Mount’s movements in town. It shouldn’t take long and it might lead to
something vital.
Rudge went in and put his views before Superintendent Hawkesworth.
Hawkesworth was impressed, and agreed to release Rudge for a couple of days.
“You’d better advise them at the Yard what you propose to do,” said
Hawkesworth. “I’ll ring them up that you’ll call.”
The first question was: How had Mount made the journey? Mount had a car,
but most persons of moderate income went by train, rail being so much cheaper
for the long distance. Mount had been at the Vicarage at one o’clock, and he had
rung up Rudge from the Charing Cross Hotel at nine. There were two, and only
two, trains he could have used, the 2.5 from Whynmouth, which reached
Waterloo at 5.45, and the 4.25 from Whynmouth, arriving at 8.35.
Rudge began by calling at the office of the local newspaper and getting a
photograph of Mount. Then he went to the station and began his enquiries. He
learned at once that Mount had been seen on the day in question. He had been
noticed particularly by both the booking-clerk and the ticket-collector, and for
the same reason. He had, it appeared, bought a London ticket, but he had not

travelled by a London train. He had gone by the 1.30 which connected at
Passfield Junction with the 11.0 a.m. express from “Waterloo to the west. He
had explained that he wished to break his journey and would go on to London by
a later train.
As Rudge jogged along in the next train to Passfield Junction, he reminded
himself of the lie of the land. The main line of the Western Division of the
Southern Railway ran from Waterloo to Devon, past Whynmouth. It did not,
however, go through Whynmouth; it ran at this point some ten miles inland.
Whynmouth was the terminus of a branch which left the main line at this
Passfield Junction, a small roadside station some fifteen miles away in the
London direction. The nearest town to Whynmouth on the main line was
Drychester. It lay on the Exeter side of Whynmouth, twelve miles away by road.
There was no direct rail connection between the two places, the route being by
Passfield Junction.
At each of the small stations between Whynmouth and Passfield Junction
Rudge jumped out of the train and enquired if the Vicar had been seen alighting
on the day in question. But it was not till he reached the junction that he got any
information.
Mr. Mount was slightly known to the stationmaster, and he believed he had
seen him on that day entering a third-class carriage of the down express. Rudge
went at once to the booking-office, and there he learned that only three thirdclass tickets had been issued by that train—a single to Exeter and two returns to
Drychester. From this it seemed pretty clear that Mount had booked to
Drychester.
In due course Rudge reached Drychester. But here he had not the same luck.
Drychester station was a busy place, very different to the small roadside
junction. No one knew Mount and no one had noticed a clergyman resembling
him.
It looked, however, as if Mount had reached Drychester at 2.40. If so, he
would have been too late to have caught the earlier of the two trains to town, and
must therefore have gone by the second, leaving Drychester at 4.50. That is, he
would have had two hours and ten minutes in Drychester. What could he have
done in that time?
Rudge could form no idea. He thought first of going down to the cathedral and
making enquiries of the vergers, but he wasn’t anxious that it should be known
that he was making this investigation. At last as a sort of forlorn hope he decided
to interrogate the taxi-men at the station, on the off-chance that Mount might
have driven to his destination.
Armed with his photograph, Rudge went round the men. He did not expect to

get much, and he was therefore agreeably surprised when he suddenly found he
had struck oil. But he did not realise, not for a long time after, how deep and
how rich was the well he had tapped.
When he showed the photograph to one of the men, a little weazened rat of a
fellow, it produced a reaction.
“Aye,” said the man, “I’ve seen the gent all right, I ’ave. But not ’ere. I’ve
seen ’im in Lingham.”
“Oh,” said Rudge, “in Lingham, have you? That’s no good to me. I’m looking
for traces of him here.”
“I didn’t see ’im ’ere, guv’nor. Never seen ’im but the once; in Lingham.”
Rudge’s fate, Mount’s fate, and the fate of several other persons trembled in
the balance. Rudge was about to pass on to the next driver, but fortunately for
himself, he didn’t. Fortunately for himself, he asked the fateful question: “When
was that?”
“Last Tuesday night,” the taxi-man replied, “at a ’ouse near Lingham, about a
’arf a mile beyond the village, an’ down on the river.”
“Beside the church?”
“That’s right, guv’nor.”
“And what time was that?”
The man paused in thought. “About midnight or a bit after.”
Rudge’s heart gave a sudden leap. Midnight or later on the night of the crime
was a very critical hour in the case. At midnight the terrible drama which led to
Admiral Penistone’s death must already have been under way. What the Vicar
was doing at midnight was something that he would be extraordinarily glad to
know.
“Better tell me all about it,” Rudge suggested, carefully keeping the eagerness
out of his voice.
But the man’s story, instead of clearing up the situation, seemed only to make
it still more incomprehensible. It seemed that on that night, the night of the
crime, he had been on duty when the last train arrived from town, the 7.0 p.m.
from Waterloo. It arrived at 10.20, and he got a fare from it. It was a lady, a
small, middle-aged woman with a bright, quick manner. As far as the taxi-man
could see in the somewhat poor light of the lamps, she was elegantly dressed and
very good-looking. Quite an attractive lady, he evidently thought. She had asked
him to drive her to a house in Lingham which she would point out, wait for her
for a few minutes, and bring her back to the Anglers’ Arms at Drychester.
Except that it was rather late to pay a call, this seemed reasonable to Rudge.
He knew the trains from town. The last train having a connection to Whynmouth
left Waterloo at 5.30. The 7.0 from town did not stop at Passfield Junction, and

the only way in which a passenger by that train could reach Whynmouth was by
driving the twelve miles from Drychester.
“I follow you,” Rudge said. “Go ahead.”
The man had driven his passenger to Lingham and she had directed him to the
house he had mentioned, near the church. She had asked him to wait on the road,
so as, she said, not to rouse the children with the sound of the engine. She had
said she would not be long. Then she had disappeared in the direction of the
house. That must have been a few minutes before eleven.
The taxi-man settled down to wait, and wait he certainly did. The few minutes
passed three or four times over, and still there was no sign of her. He began to
get impatient, and getting out of the taxi, he walked up the short drive till he got
in sight of the house, which had been hidden behind a small plantation. The
house was dark and silent and no one seemed to be about. The taxi-man grew
anxious about his fare, and he went forward and knocked at the first door he
came to. Rudge recognised it as the side-door. For a time no one answered, and
the taxi-man knocked louder and louder. At last a window opened upstairs and
this parson put his head out. What was it: a sick call? The taxi-man gave him
clearly to understand it was not a sick call, and the parson said he’d come down.
He came down and asked what was wrong. The taxi-man asked would his
passenger soon be out, as he had an early job in the morning and he didn’t want
to spend the night waiting at the gate. The parson evidently didn’t know
anything about the lady, but he asked for a description of her. Then suddenly he
seemed to recognise her. He appeared upset for a moment, then he said it was all
right, that he thought the lady was a friend of the housekeeper’s, and if the taximan would wait a moment longer he would find out when she was leaving. He
disappeared for three or four minutes, then he returned to say that the lady had
been taken with a fainting fit, and in the excitement the taxi had been forgotten.
The lady was not well enough to go back to Drychester that night, but would
stay with his housekeeper, and he would pay the taxi. He had done so. The taximan had returned to Drychester, and that was all he knew about it.
Here was a fresh complication! Rudge swore. Instead of things straightening
themselves out, the tangle was getting worse.
“Tell me,” said Rudge, “you drove through Lingham, didn’t you?”
“Correct, guv’nor.”
“Did you stop there?”
“Not above a minute or two. I stopped and the lady directed me which way to
go.”
Here was at least something. This must have been the car Constable
Hempstead had seen. So far as it went, Hempstead’s report was corroboration of

the story.
Rudge postponed consideration of the affair, and walked to the Anglers’
Arms, which was near the station. And there he got some news which, he
thought, entirely justified his suspicions.
It seemed that about seven o’clock on the evening in question, a telegram had
been received from Waterloo, to the effect that the sender, Mrs. Marsh, was
going to Drychester by the next train and required a room to be reserved for the
night. Also, she wished the hotel to be left open, as owing to having to pay a call
on arrival, she could not reach it till midnight or later. The room had been duly
prepared and the porter had waited up till nearly two, but the lady had not turned
up, nor had anything been since heard of her.
This certainly did back up the tale that the lady had intended to return from
Lingham Vicarage to Drychester. So far the thing looked bona fide enough. It
would, however, be easy to get the details at the Vicarage. In the meantime
Rudge must not lose sight of his present quest: what was Mount doing at
Drychester?
He produced his photograph and asked if the hotel manager had ever seen the
original. And then came the information which brought all his suspicions of
Mount back with a rush and made him congratulate himself on having followed
up this line of the case.
Mount, it appeared, had called at the hotel on the day following that on which
the telegram had been received, and Rudge saw that he must have gone there
immediately on arrival in Drychester. He had stated that he was conducting a
delicate enquiry on behalf of a member of his church. It concerned an unhappy
marriage; he hoped the manager would not ask for details. His parishioner’s wife
had intended to meet her husband on the previous night with reference to a
possible reconciliation, returning afterwards to the Anglers’ Arms and there
spending the night. But she had not turned up and his friend was very distressed
about her. He, the friend, wishing to keep his family skeleton hidden, had not
himself come to the hotel to make enquiries, but had deputed him, the Vicar, to
do so in his stead. Could the manager give him any information about the lady?
The Vicar could not say under what name she might have registered.
Though the manager did not personally know Mount, he had seen him at
functions at the cathedral, and was satisfied of his bona fides. He therefore gave
him all the information at his disposal. Mr. Mount had thanked him and had at
once left.
Rudge imagined that this interview had probably constituted Mount’s whole
business in Drychester, but to make assurance as sure as possible, he went to the
cathedral and in the guise of a former parishioner, asked the head verger if he

had ever heard of his old rector, the Rev. Philip Mount, who he believed was
now in charge of a parish somewhere near. From this beginning it was easy to
steer the conversation in the way it should go, and Rudge was soon convinced
that the Vicar had not been at the cathedral on the day in question.
Rudge caught the last train to town that night. Next morning he was early at
Scotland Yard, where he explained that he wanted to make some enquiries at the
Charing Cross Hotel and possibly elsewhere. He was asked if he required help,
and on his saying that he did not, he was told to go ahead and ring up if he was
stuck.
Assured of a free hand, Rudge went on to the hotel. There with the aid of his
photograph he had no difficulty in establishing the fact that Mount had arrived at
a few minutes before nine on the evening he rang up, evidently from the train
arriving at Waterloo at 8.35. So far as was known he had not gone out that night.
Next morning he had paid his bill after breakfast and left.
So far it had been plain sailing for Rudge. Enquiries at the reception office
and from waiters and chambermaids had quickly brought him his information.
But now he was up against something stiffer. In vain he questioned porters and
messenger boys. The head porter remembered seeing the Vicar, but he couldn’t
remember how he had left. He or one of his staff might have got a taxi for him,
but they got so many taxis they couldn’t be sure.
Rudge was extremely persistent, but success did not crown his efforts. Mount
had gone, but no one knew how.
Rudge went out into the square in front of the station. In all probability Mount
had walked to where he had wanted to go, or, if not, had taken a ’bus or gone
down to the Underground. If so, Rudge did not see how he could possibly get on
his track, and he would be forced to return to Whynmouth and fall back on the
chance of getting a statement. Such a statement Mount might, of course, refuse
to make, and Rudge didn’t see how he could force it from him. No, if he, Rudge,
could find out what Mount had done in town, it would be infinitely better.
He wondered whether Mount might not after all have taken a taxi. The porters
might have forgotten the circumstance, or Mount might have come out into the
square and hailed one himself. Rudge decided to make enquiries of those drivers
who used ranks near the hotel.
He began at once, and a long job he found it. To man after man he showed his
photograph and asked if he had taken the Vicar up. And man after man shook his
head and said he had never seen the gentleman.
But Rudge persevered. These enquiries were his only hope, and he would be
quite sure they led nowhere before abandoning them. And then at last his
perseverance reaped its just reward. A driver came in from a job and took his

place at the tail of the line. Rudge went up to him with his photograph.
The driver was by way of being discreet. He had seen Mount, but he didn’t
know what business of Rudge’s that was. A little judicious backsheesh, however,
overcame his scruples, and he told what he knew. Mount, it appeared, had hailed
him from the station square and told him to drive to Judd Street, to a private
hotel. He didn’t just remember the number, but he could find the place again.
“Then find it,” said Rudge, getting in.
Presently they drew up at Friedlander’s Private Hotel and in a couple of
minutes Rudge was interviewing the manageress. Yes, the clergyman of the
photograph had called on the morning in question. He had asked to see Mrs.
Arkwright, a lady who had been staying with them for some three weeks. But
Mrs. Arkwright had gone away unexpectedly the evening before and had not yet
returned, so the clergyman was disappointed. He had left his name and address:
Rev. Philip Mount, Lingham Vicarage, Whynmouth, Dorset, and asked that Mrs.
Arkwright be requested to ring him up when she returned. He had then gone
away.
Rudge turned the conversation on to Mrs. Arkwright. The manageress was
reticent, but still he managed to pick up a good deal. Mrs. Arkwright was
middle-aged, small, active and vivacious. She was decidedly good-looking and
always dressed well. Though evidently not rich, she seemed comfortably off.
The manageress was not certain that she might not be French. They had a French
girl staying at the hotel, and Mrs. Arkwright spoke French to her as fluently as
she spoke English to the others.
Rudge felt he was getting on. That this Mrs. Arkwright had unexpectedly
travelled from London to Drychester on the evening before the crime now
seemed clear. Having during the journey mysteriously become Mrs. Marsh, she
had driven to the Vicarage and there vanished.
Rudge would have liked to search the lady’s room and belongings, but he had
no warrant and he did not think he could manage it otherwise. However, by
judicious pumping he obtained a little more information from the manageress.
Mrs. Arkwright was pleasant-mannered and a favourite among the residents.
She had not, however, many friends of her own, by which the manageress meant
visitors. Indeed the manageress might say she had only one visitor, a man who
called at irregular intervals. He was tall and distinguished-looking, and his
forehead was bronzed, as if he had lived in some hot country. The manageress
indeed had seldom seen so good-looking a man. His name was Mr. Jellett.
Rudge was in a reflective frame of mind as he left the hotel and automatically
turned his steps to the nearest tube station. There was something very puzzling
about this whole business. That this Mrs. Arkwright or Marsh had gone to the

Vicarage on the night of the murder, there could be no doubt. But it wasn’t at all
certain that she had seen Mount. From what he had said to the taxi-man it was
difficult to believe that Mount knew she was there. At the same time Rudge
found it equally difficult to believe the story about her visiting the housekeeper
and getting a fainting fit. In either case where had the woman disappeared to? It
almost seemed as if Mount himself did not know and that his journeys to
Drychester and London were simply an effort to find out.
To Rudge it looked very much as if there had been some secret negotiations in
progress between the Vicar and this woman. Whether he had seen her on the
night of the crime or not, something had happened to make him want to see her
the next day. And there was an element of secrecy about the whole thing which
looked anything but well.
Then Rudge remembered something he had been told by the garrulous
landlady of the Lord Marshall Hotel at Whynmouth. This man, Mount, had had
trouble in his life. His wife had run away from him with some man. Now could it
be … ?
Rudge whistled softly between his teeth. If Mrs. Arkwright-Marsh were really
Mrs. Mount, it might at least partially account for these mysterious proceedings.
Some question, possibly that of a divorce, might have been raised, which would
have necessitated an immediate interview. This would account for the visit to the
Vicarage and Mount’s subsequent journey to town, though it might not explain
Mount’s denying knowledge of her call. Oh, yes, it might, though. Rudge saw
that he had been wrong. In the excitement of discussing a divorce the taxi might
well have been forgotten, and when Mount found it waiting he might have
invented the story about the housekeeper to allay possible scandal.
On the whole Rudge thought this theory promising enough to justify further
enquiry into it. He did not see, it must be admitted, how it was connected with
the death of Admiral Penistone, but that connection was suggested by the boat,
the hat, and particularly by the Vicar’s eagerness at the inquest.
How, Rudge wondered, could he find out about Mount’s erring wife? He
thought for a while, then, returning to the Yard, borrowed a Crockford. From
this he found that Mount had been in his present position for ten years, before
which he had been a curate in one of the Hull churches. Rudge immediately put
through a call to the Superintendent at Hull, asking him to try to obtain a
description and if possible a photograph of Mrs. Mount.
In a couple of hours there was a reply to say that a photograph and description
had been obtained and were being sent up to the Yard.
On Monday morning they arrived. The photograph had been got from one of
the local newspaper offices, and showed the lady in a hospital committee group.

The description gave Rudge a thrill of satisfaction. It looked as if he were on the
right track.
In half an hour he was back in the hotel in Judd Street. He was sorry to trouble
the manageress again, but would she be good enough to tell him if Mrs.
Arkwright was among this group?
The manageress hesitated a little, but when he explained that the photograph
was ten years old she became quite certain. Yes, that fourth lady from the left
was undoubtedly Mrs. Arkwright.
Full of self-satisfaction, Rudge took the first train from Waterloo. Determined
to be thorough, he went to Drychester and saw his friend, the taxi-man. Here he
had not such definite confirmation, though the man agreed that his passenger
might well have been the original of the photo.
It was with the gratifying consciousness of something attempted, something
done, that Rudge returned to the police station at Whynmouth that afternoon to
report his progress to Superintendent Hawkesworth. Hawkesworth, however,
took the disappointingly narrow view of achievement so frequently displayed by
Authority.
“Huh,” he said when Rudge had finished, “it looks to me like a wash-out. This
blessed parson is considering making things up with his wife or divorcing her or
whatever you like to make it. But that won’t help us any with the question of
who killed old Penistone. What do you propose to do now?”
“I thought, sir, of going to Mount and asking for an explanation.”
Hawkesworth frowned. “An explanation of just what?” he asked.
“An explanation of where Mrs. Mount went to that night. The boat was gone;
it was connected with the murder; who took it? Did Mrs. Mount? I think, sir, we
could press that question under the circumstances.”
The Superintendent considered, then nodded shortly. “Very well; try it. You
may as well, now you’ve gone so far.”
Rudge was bitterly indignant as he drove out to Lingham Vicarage. This was
always what happened when you took trouble and did anything specially well!
What sort of mind had Hawkesworth? Surely to goodness it was clear that this
information about Mrs. Mount was vital? Her unexpected visit to the Vicarage
on the night of the crime; her unexpected disappearance after arrival there;
Mount’s ignorance or assumed ignorance of the whole affair. The boat; the hat;
Mount’s sudden attempt to find his wife; Mount’s subterfuges to keep his real
business from leaking out—ecclesiastical matters, he had said to Rudge; a
parishioner’s unhappy marriage, he had told the Drychester hotel-keeper; family
news, he had explained to the lady in Judd Street. …
In fact the whole thing was darned fishy, and he would be bound to get some

valuable information from Mount. Somewhat cheered, Rudge set out for the
Vicarage.

CHAPTER X
By Edgar Jepson
THE BATHROOM BASIN
had been cherishing his aunt, Mrs.
Emery. At first when she returned to her native neighbourhood and settled down
at Rundel Croft, he had showed himself nephewly, but in moderation, certainly
not to the point of cherishing her, and even now the cherishing, it is to be feared,
was not a natural effusion of pure nepotic feeling. It was the result of feeling,
indeed, of two feelings: a strong feeling, a hunch, in fact, that the secret of the
murder of the Admiral was to be found in Rundel Croft, and a scarcely less
strong feeling that the society of Jennie Merton was good for him.
So it came about that during the last week he had been often in the house.
When he was on his round, all kinds of reasons for just looking in on his aunt
occurred to him; the house being empty, except for her and Jennie and Emery,
burglars might have broken in, or the chickens might have been stolen; or he had
to ask her some question, connected with the mystery, of no great importance; or
he had to give her some information, of no great importance, about the progress
of the police towards the solution of it. He was gifted with a quite decent
creative imagination, which, doubtless, was often of use to him in the witnessbox. When he was off duty he would, in nephewly fashion, drop in to tea or
supper.
It is to be doubted that Mrs. Emery, who had rather more than her fair share of
womanly intelligence, as the wives of the Emerys of this world generally have,
ascribed his assiduity to the finer feelings of a nephew. She perceived that Jennie
was, as a rule, at hand—she would have a good view of the drive from the
windows of the upper part of the house, where most of her work lay—to open
the door to him when he called. Also she had once heard her say, as she was
bringing him from the back door to the kitchen: “Oh, go hon, Mr. Hempstead!”
Well, as Mrs. Emery saw it, Jennie was a good girl, as girls go nowadays, and
showed quite a lot of sense in the way she was picking up cooking, and cooking
was what a man really wanted when he was married; and in any case Dick was
one of those pig-headed young men, who will go their own way, and he might
do worse. Anyhow, who was she to interfere with love’s young dream?
So it came about that Hempstead had had the run of Rundel Croft, for Elma
POLICE CONSTABLE RICHARD HEMPSTEAD

Holland and her husband had not been in his way. If sometimes he was not
alone, but accompanied by Jennie, when he was having the run of it, it did no
one any harm. Also, he was a useful man to have about, for in a big house like
Rundel Croft little things were always getting out of order and going wrong, and
he was useful with his hands. Mrs. Emery soon fell into the way of getting him
to set the little things right that the Admiral had been used to set right, putting a
spring in a lock that had ceased to work, restoring a patch of paint that had been
rubbed off, to maintain in fact the spick and spanness the Admiral had
demanded. He was a useful visitor.
He had inspired into Jennie his strong opinion that the solution of the mystery
of the murder was to be found in the house, and though she would have helped
him in his search, or at any rate superintended it at intervals, in any case, that
identity of opinion made her help him with enthusiasm.
Together they searched the house with uncommon thoroughness, every nook
and cranny of it, especially the Admiral’s study and bedroom and Elma
Holland’s sitting-room and bedroom, hunting above all for the missing white
frock in which Elma had dined at the Vicarage.
“Mind you, Jennie, I don’t say as you’re wrong in thinking that she packed it
up that morning and took it to London with her,” he said. “But there’s a
possibility that she rolled it up small and stuffed it away in some hole or corner,
and if so be as we could find it, I’ll eat my helmet if we don’t find it marked in
some way or another that would be a useful clue. It might even be bloodstained.”
“It might truly,” said Jennie in thoughtful agreement.
They found several holes and corners in which the frock might have been
hidden; but they did not find the frock.
Then on Monday afternoon as they were finishing their tea (and it was just
about the time that Inspector Rudge was reporting at Whynmouth police station)
Mrs. Emery said: “There’s one thing, Dick, as you might have a look at before
you go, and that’s the basin in the bathroom. Miss Elma complained, when she
came back, that the water ran out of it very slowly and now it’s quite choked up
and it won’t run out of it at all. It’s a job for a plumber, I know; but you might be
able to do something with it.”
“Well, that’s easy, Aunt,” said Hempstead with manly confidence. “It’s just a
matter of clearing out the trap.”
He finished his tea—he was always rather longer about it than his uncle and
the two women—and having gathered the tools he wanted from the house toolbox, he and Jennie went up to the bathroom, and he got to work. It was an easy
job, for, after he had taken up the linoleum, he found the board in the floor above

the trap loose, to enable the inevitable plumber to get at the trap easily. He
unscrewed the nuts and lifted the cover off the trap. The trap was choked with
hair, and he began to pull it out. He was struck by its coarseness and paused to
examine it.
Then he said: “This is rum. If I hadn’t seen the beard on the Admiral’s chin, I
should have said as he’d shaved it off.”
“It is like the Admiral’s beard,” said Jennie. “Only it’s not so grey.”
Hempstead picked the rest of the beard out of the trap carefully and put it in
the little enamel basin he had brought up with him to hold the debris that was
choking the trap, with a very thoughtful air.
Then he said: “Aunt said that Mrs. Holland complained of how slowly the
water ran out of the basin when she came back from London after getting
married. I don’t suppose anybody had used that basin between then and the
morning after the Admiral was murdered.”
“I don’t suppose they did,” said Jennie.
“So, if anyone was shaving off his beard—” said Hempstead thoughtfully and
stopped short.
He had said enough. It was no good talking about things. Besides, he wanted
to think it out.
“I shouldn’t say anything about this, not even to my aunt or uncle,” he said.
“It may be important.”
“Of course not,” said Jennie. “And certainly not to your aunt. It would be all
over the place before night.”
“And you might find me a piece of thick brown paper. I can’t dry this hair in
front of the kitchen fire ’cos my aunt would see it.”
“Of course you can’t,” said Jennie, and she went in search of brown paper.
Presently she came back with it. Hempstead squeezed the water out of the
shaved-off hairs and wrapped them in the brown paper and put the little packet
in his pocket. They went down to the kitchen.
“I suppose nobody used that basin between Mrs. Holland’s going away to get
married and coming back, Aunt?” he said.
“Nobody that I know of,” said Mrs. Emery.
“Well, I’ve cleaned out that trap for you, and the water’s running quite free
again,” he said and took his leave of them.
He went away thoughtful, thinking it out, in search of Inspector Rudge.
He found him just outside the Vicarage gates, displayed his find and told him
where he had come across it.
“It is,” said the Inspector, “a rum go—in the trap of the bathroom basin at
Rundel Croft? Well, well.”

His eyes brightened as he began to perceive the implications of the discovery.
“Yes, sir. And Mrs. Holland complained that the water was running slow out
of the basin when she came back after gettin’ married, and nobody seems to
have used that basin between that and her going away. It looks as if there
couldn’t have been any hairs in that trap when the Admiral went off to dinner at
the Vicarage the night he was murdered. There certainly hasn’t been anyone
with a beard in the house since Mrs. Holland went away the morning after the
murder.”
“What you mean is that whoever shaved off that beard shaved it off on the
night of the murder?” said the Inspector, frowning thoughtfully.
“That’s right, sir.”
“Mr. Holland didn’t wear a beard by any chance?” said the Inspector.
“No, sir: I saw him about three or four times when he was courting Mrs.
Holland and he was just the same as now.”
“Ah,” said the Inspector, and he went on frowning.
Then he said: “But whoever it was called that night at the Lord Marshall and
asked for Mr. Holland, did have a beard, and it seemed to me pretty clear that it
wasn’t the Admiral at all, and this seems to settle it. Whoever wore the beard, he
went back to Rundel Croft and shaved it off.”
“That’s right, sir,” said Hempstead.
“Well, he couldn’t have done that, unless he knew someone at Rundel Croft
very well, and it could only have been the Admiral himself or Mrs. Holland. If
the Admiral was alive, it might have been him; but if the Admiral was dead, it
could only have been Mrs. Holland,” said the Inspector.
“But it could hardly have been the Admiral, sir, because whoever it was
shaved off his beard, he shaved it off because he didn’t want anyone to know
that he’d been pretending to be the Admiral,” said Hempstead.
“Exactly, and it doesn’t seem likely that the Admiral should want anyone to
pretend to be him. But it was someone who knew one of them, right enough.”
“But the very last place that anyone who’d committed the murder would want
to be seen in, is about here,” protested Hempstead.
“M’m,” said the Inspector. “If you’d seen the silly things murderers do that
I’ve seen. Besides, there are some people who call themselves criminologists,
who say that a murderer always goes back to the scene of his crime.”
“Does he now?”
“No, he doesn’t,” said the Inspector.
He was silent, considering the possibilities opened up by Hempstead’s
discovery.
Then, glowing with quiet cheerfulness, he added: “Well, what we want is a

man with a beard who has shaved it off. Now, where have I seen a man lately
who’d shaved off his beard? I fancy I have.”

CHAPTER XI
By Clemence Dane
AT THE VICARAGE
rang, and, getting no answer, rang again. He could hear the bell jangling
in the deeps of the house, but he could not hear any sound of footsteps. The
peace of summer which lay upon the garden had had its effect, apparently, upon
the house itself. All its blinds were down and he could hear the loud ticking of
the grandfather clock in the hall. Putting his eye to the key-hole, he observed: (a)
That there was no key in the lock, and (b) that the hall was empty. No guilty
Vicar was standing within upon the mat, quaking in his shoes, afraid to ignore
the summons yet afraid to open. All was a tea-time quiet, yet there was no
pleasant chink of china, no tinkle of spoons. “Doubtless,” thought Inspector
Rudge, “the maids are taking tea out of doors. Girls often carry out their sewing
to a paddock. I’ll go round.”
He went round. The neat, flagged courtyard at the back was, however, equally
deserted. The kitchen door was locked, and there was nobody in the sheds at the
further side of the yard. On the kitchen door, however, a card was pinned, a
white card such as is used at funerals, and on it was inscribed: BACK AT SEVENTHIRTY.
So that was that! Unwillingly, for in spite of his professional zeal Inspector
Rudge would have enjoyed a cup of tea, he tramped out of the little yard. The
noisy echoes of his feet breaking the silence, he skirted the garden. He should
have gone straight out into the street, and knew it. Unless he were doing his
official duty he was a trespasser without rights. But he had two hours to put in
before he could return. Virtuously, he resolved to wander about the village,
dropping questions casually, as Cockneys drop aitches, and perhaps visit that
village sphinx, old Wade, in the hope of gleaning some stray straw of
information. Still, it was exceedingly hot. Why hurry? Besides, wasn’t that a
greengage tree strapped up like a flogged prisoner to the wall at the corner of the
garden?
Now, if Inspector Rudge had a weakness, it was for that deceptive fruit, the
greengage. The Londoner knows gages only in boxes or barrow-tainted, knows
that you have to eat three brackish spheres plucked too early, for the sake of the
one sugary perfection plucked too late. But a small boy, Tommy Rudge, had
RUDGE

stayed at his grandmother’s somewhere up in Norfolk, thirty years earlier, and
had eaten Norfolk gages from just such a wall. Memory, the experienced harpist,
plucked at the Inspector’s heart-strings. There was the tree: there were the
greengages, each with the golden crack of perfection widening on its jade cheek.
The Inspector o’erleaped the years and the three feet of lettuce-bed at the same
moment. He plucked, ate, dripped juice from chin and fingers, and dropped the
stone at his feet.
As he did so a glint of light caught his eyes and made him peer downwards.
The glint explained itself quickly enough, but it was not the bit of broken bottle
winking in the sun which held his attention after that first preliminary glance: yet
his attention was held—held by a couple of greengage stones, not of his spittingout, but not yet dry. By them lay a handkerchief, juice-stained, rolled into a ball,
and on the bare ground at the foot of the tree were footprints, small, neat
footprints. “Size three,” thought Rudge, mechanically appraising, “and French
heels at that!”
Stooping without moving in his tracks, he drew the handkerchief to him,
shook it out. It unrolled easily, for it was still wet: somebody clearly enough had
wiped fingertips messed with juice upon it. Then, unsteadily rising, still careful
not to disturb the neighbouring tracks, he examined his find.
It was stained, it was crumpled; but the linen was fine, the embroidery
delicate. “Two-fifteen a dozen,” estimated the accurate Inspector Rudge, who
had a gift for acquiring information of the oddest kind, and whose mother, a
lady’s maid in her day, had always seen to it that his information was correct.
“Two-fifteen at a guess, unless it’s sales,” repeated Inspector Rudge
thoughtfully, when, fingering the corners, he discovered in one of them, small,
detached, not part of the pattern, the initial C.
Very thoughtfully Inspector Rudge smoothed and folded the handkerchief,
produced from his notebook a clean envelope, tucked it in, and restored the
whole to an inner pocket. Yet more thoughtfully he glanced about him, hesitated
over the stones, shook his head, considered the footprints, shook his head again,
then, with a precaution entirely unlike his impetuous arrival, high-stepped off the
bed on to the path, and began pacing majestically to and fro once more.
The late afternoon sun poured down upon his bowed shoulders till his blue
serge suit shone sordidly, as blue serge will on a fine day. An inquisitive robin,
mistaking him by his gait for the gardener, kept pace with him in the bushes. So
slow was his progress that Michaelmas daisies, swaying over the path and
pushed aside as he passed, had time to beat his broad back resentfully. For the
Inspector was deep in thought and something more than thought. He was
floundering, as once or twice before in his strange life he had floundered, out of

the shallow of common sense into the unplumbed deeps of instinct. A mood was
on him: that part of his mind which, as he put it, “felt through his elbows” was in
charge. Something was wrong, somewhere, somehow, and Inspector Rudge
knew it. There was no one in the house as far as he could tell. He had spied into
the hall and found it empty: the placard on the back door was explanation
enough. Someone might be hiding in the house, of course. But why should they
be? There was no sense in it. And Inspector Rudge had nothing at all to go upon,
not even his own shrewd reasoning powers, not even his faculty of putting two
and two together and making twenty-two of them. No, he had nothing but the
handkerchief with the stained proof that someone had recently been in the
garden, and his own feeling in his elbows that something was wrong.
There was no one in the house as far as he could tell, but he had the oddest
feeling that there was someone in the garden. So strong a feeling was it that
twice he stopped and turned round sharp to stare down the overgrown glories of
the long, straight path. Empty of course. Only an honest blaze of sunshine
greeted him. Red, white, blue and yellow heat blazed up again from the mounds
of pyrethrum, the early purple daisies, the phloxes. The guardian hollyhocks
stood motionless in the heavy, sun-saturated air. What’s wrong with honest
sunshine and rejoicing flowers? What’s wrong with the Vicarage garden, just
after tea-time on an August afternoon? He turned and resumed his slow pacing.
Something was wrong.
If “C” were Mrs. Mount, then within the last quarter of an hour Mrs. Mount
had been in her former husband’s garden, eating her former husband’s
greengages, perfectly comfortably and at home. And now she was—where? In
the house? Why should she be? But she might. He had never seen her
handwriting, and it was just possible that she had written BACK AT SEVEN-THIRTY
on the funeral card. And where did she get such a card unless she had been in the
house? It was the sort of card you would find in a parson’s study, but hardly in a
fashionable handbag. Had she written the message, written it, knowing that the
servants were out, in her late husband’s study? For whom was the message? For
the incomprehensible Vicar? For the handsome unknown who occasionally came
to see her at the hotel? Why half-past seven? Suppose she hadn’t written the
message. Suppose a maidservant had written it? Or the Vicar?
He had an impulse to go to the door and remove that telltale card, then
restrained it. The card was a message for someone. Suppose that someone had
not yet arrived and read it? Better not disturb the situation.
Unregretfully the Inspector cast aside all thoughts of a hot potter through the
drowsy village, of unprofitable conversations with tinker, tailor and candlestickmaker, and another interview with old Neddy Ware. And more regretfully he

cast aside also the pleasant, planned finale to that hot potter. No arrival at the
local inn for Inspector Rudge, no deep draught of delicious beer, cooled in the
well. Instead, instinctively and professionally the Inspector abandoned the open
path for the little strip of lawn that ended in a shrubbery, and insinuated himself
between the laurels. These began where the kitchen garden ended, and swept
round the front garden, thus protecting by a twelve-foot belt of foliage the lawn
and the house from the view of passers-by in the road.
The Inspector knew his duty. He glanced at his watch: it was nearing six. If
anybody arrived at the Vicarage between that hour and the seven-thirty of the
notice at the back door, Inspector Rudge intended to know of it. The laurels were
dirty, as laurels are even in the depths of the country, and the ground below them
was dusty. His coign of vantage was airless and intolerably hot. Nevertheless,
there Inspector Rudge intended to remain until the writer of the card returned or
its destined reader arrived.
He made himself as comfortable as he could, though he did not dare smoke;
but he kept chewing-gum for such emergencies and played noughts-and-crosses
with himself, patiently; for the loam upon which he lay was dry and loose as
sand. As the shadows lengthened the air grew cooler and he suffered less from
heat but more from midges. But it was not until the village church had struck
seven that his devotion was rewarded. Voices, cheerful and unlowered, struck
upon his ear. The hidden gate of the drive creaked and banged again. Footsteps
sounded the other side of the impenetrable wall of laurels and holly that divided
the lawn from the entrance. Two figures swung round it deep in conversation,
reached the porch, dived into its shadows, and the taller figure tugged at the bell.
Inspector Rudge gripped the tough laurel stems in his amazement. The last
people in the world he expected at this hour in this place were the Hollands,
husband and wife. What were they saying? What were they doing? He could
hear the bell jangling, but he could not hear their words: and the porch was so
deep in shadow that he could not watch their faces. Should he emerge and crossquestion?
While he hesitated they turned in the doorway and Holland’s voice rang clear.
“We may as well wait.”
His wife came out on the gravel.
“What’s the time now?”
Her husband looked at his watch.
“Just past seven.”
Elma hesitated.
“I’m not coming all this way for nothing.”
“Have you considered,” Holland said uneasily, “that it may be a trap?”

“A trap? How could it be?”
“Well—” He hesitated. “How much does Célie know?”
“Oh, don’t fuss so, Arthur. It’s hot and I won’t be harried. Sit down a little.”
And, crossing the lawn, she sank into the worn hammock that swung between
two boughs of the giant cedar, while her husband flung himself on the grass
beside her.
For some ten minutes the two sat there, saying little. Inspector Rudge cursed
his luck. Nine out of ten women would have talked a rope about their necks in
ten such idle minutes. It was his luck to be suspecting a woman outside his
experience, a woman who could sit still and say nothing. Even when she tired of
her immobility still she held her tongue, gave neither watcher a reason for her
sudden movement. But when she swung her feet to the ground and began to
stroll towards the house, her husband instantly rose and joined her. Had she
signalled to him? Did she know herself watched? wondered Rudge. But he was
sure that he himself had not stirred; nevertheless he remained perfectly still.
Elma Holland, Inspector Rudge considered, was quite capable of setting a
counter-trap. Meantime the pair had reached the house once more, and Holland’s
voice came ringing over the grass.
“I say, the door’s ajar.”
“She must have come in without our seeing,” the woman’s voice answered
him. “Come on! Let’s go in! She must be somewhere,” and they disappeared.
Inspector Rudge drew a deep sigh of relief. At last he could move, could
yawn, could stretch himself, could lift the weight of his body off one unfortunate
foot, which, doubled under him, was almost asleep. It was a very bad attack of
pins and needles indeed. He was just beginning gently to massage it when he
was nearly startled out of his senses by the sound, faint but unmistakable, of a
scream. He stiffened where he sat. Then, pulling himself to his feet, was
preparing to grope his way into the open, when nearer, much louder, much more
vigorous, came a second scream, a whole series of screams; and there burst out
of the dark open entry the figure of Elma Holland.
Once out of the doorway she appeared to have no further power to walk,
though she laboured forward a short step or two as if she were thrusting her way
through an invisible hedge. Her face was white as the washed walls of the house,
and as her husband, who came racing the next moment across the threshold,
reached her, she fell back into his arms like a stuffed sack.
The Inspector was not much less swift, but as he broke through the bushes and
ran across the lawn to them, his thought ran ahead of him—“What has she seen
to break her nerve like that?” Then, as he reached the huddled pair, he noted the
condition of Holland’s hands and, first crying: “Here! Out of my way!”—added

“and stay where you are!” pushed past them, leaped up the steps, dashed across
the hall and flung open the dining-room door. Empty! So was the drawing-room.
But the door of the Vicar’s study was open. In went Rudge and cast a hurried
glance about him.
Very still was the study, barred with sun and shadow, very cool, very dark. It
was a pleasant coolness and a pleasant darkness after the glare of the lawn.
“Quiet as a tomb,” thought the Inspector to himself. “So what’s she screaming
about?” Then, as he moved to the writing-table, which was set at an angle to the
window, rampart-wise, he saw what Elma Holland had screamed about.
Slid down upon the floor between the desk and the wall lay the body of a
woman. Her eyes were open and glazed like the eyes of a carefully painted
waxwork; on her cheeks the make-up stood out in hectic patches on the skin. Her
two hands were clasped upon her breast, not peacefully, but in a last gesture of
energy. They were clasped about a knife-handle, whose blade was sunk in the
stained folds of her flowered summer dress.

CHAPTER XII
By Anthony Berkeley
CLEARING UP THE MESS
plumped down on his knees beside her, heedless of the blood which lay
everywhere on the carpet. The woman was still warm, and the blood had
scarcely ceased to flow from her breast. But quite certainly she was dead.
A voice from the doorway brought the Inspector to his feet again.
“We were in the hall when she did it. We actually heard her fall.” Holland
spoke gravely, but without any traces of panic.
Rudge frowned. “I thought I told you to stop outside, sir.”
“Oh, damn your rotten little orders, man. Here’s a woman stabbed herself; it’s
no time to stand on ceremony. Is there anything we can do? Is she dead? Are you
certain?”
Rudge got slowly to his feet. “She’s dead right enough. Must have died just
about the time you were in the house.”
“She died in my arms, then,” said Holland sombrely.
Rudge glanced at the blood on the other’s hand, and Holland nodded.
“I held her up for a second,” he said. “I thought she was dead, so didn’t
disturb her hands or take the weapon out.”
“That was wise of you, sir.”
“You know who she is, of course? My wife’s French maid—Célie.”
“Ah!” said Rudge. “I shall have a few questions to ask you and Mrs.
Holland.”
“Later,” Holland said, in his masterful way. “My wife’s very much upset at
the moment. Naturally. I can’t have her worried till she’s had time to recover.”
Rudge lifted his eyebrows slightly, but all he said was: “I must ask you not to
leave these premises for the present, either of you. Where is Mrs. Holland now?”
“I put her in a hammock, on the lawn. I must get back to her. We’ll wait for
you there, Inspector. Anything we can tell you, of course, we will.”
There was the sound of footsteps on the gravel outside, which marched
without hesitation into the hall. “Anyone about?” called a voice. The next
moment the figure of the ubiquitous reporter from the Evening Gazette appeared
in the doorway. With a muttered word Holland slid past him and out of the
house.
RUDGE

A shaft of sunlight from the window flashed cheerfully on the reporter’s hornrimmed spectacles. “Hullo, Inspector. Didn’t expect to see you. Is the Vicar
about?” He caught sight of what lay at Rudge’s feet. “My God—what’s this?”
“I understand it’s Mam’selle Célie,” Rudge replied austerely, “Mrs. Holland’s
late maid. And I must ask you to leave me alone here, if you please. I’ll see you
get your story later. There are—” Further sounds of footsteps outside caused him
to break off short. Both men listened intently. Again the footsteps progressed
without hesitation into the house, and along to the study. The Vicar came into
the room.
“Why, Inspector,” he said in surprise. “I didn’t know you were to be present
too. Has—oh!” For a moment he appeared too frozen with horror to move. Then
he threw himself on his knees beside the body with a little cry. “Celia!”
“Don’t touch her, please, sir.” Rudge bent down as if to guard the body from
the Vicar’s ministrations.
The latter turned a ravaged face up to him. “She’s dead?”
“I’m afraid so, sir.”
“She hasn’t—killed herself?”
“It looks uncommonly like it, sir.”
Mr. Mount dropped his face into his hands and remained motionless for nearly
a minute. When he spoke again it was with more self-possession.
“Inspector, you know who this poor soul is?”
“She’s already been identified, sir, as Mrs. Holland’s late French maid.”
“Yes.” The Vicar paused for a moment, as if to stiffen himself in a resolve.
“Inspector, there are many things connected with this tragedy that I cannot tell
you. My lips are sealed by the confessional. But if it will serve the interests of
justice this much I can say: this poor woman is my wife. And alas, I fear that it is
I who drove her to this terrible deed.”

2
“You, sir?” said the Inspector sharply. “How is that?” Then catching sight of
the newspaper man, he added: “Here, I told you to clear out.” He was about to
seize the fellow by the shoulder and hustle him out of the room, by way of some
physical vent for the various emotions that were boiling inside him, when he saw
from the other’s white face and shaking hands that it was not just callous
professional curiosity which had kept him there; the man looked indeed almost
incapable of walking. Rudge laid a gentle instead of a ferocious hand on his arm,
and led him towards the door. “In the War, weren’t you?”
The reporter mustered up a shaky smile. “Yes, but we didn’t kill—women. I

think I’m going to be sick.”
The Vicar pushed past the Inspector and took charge, leading the man into a
small lavatory that opened off the hall just inside the front door. “Stay there till
you feel better,” he nodded, and returned with the Inspector to the study.
“Turns some people up, blood does,” commented the latter. “Now, sir—you
were going to tell me?”
They stood side by side, looking down on the dead woman. “Poor soul, poor
soul,” muttered the Vicar. “The mother of my boys, Inspector. Perhaps I was too
harsh with her. Too narrow, perhaps. Yet what else could I have done? My creed
expressly forbids divorce. ‘Those whom God hath joined together let no man put
asunder. …’ It’s too explicit.”
“She wanted you to divorce her?” Rudge gently dropped the question into the
Vicar’s musings, which seemed to be addressed more to himself than to the
Inspector.
“Yes. I never knew the name of the man who induced her to run away with
him; she always refused to tell me; perhaps it was better so. But he seems to
have been kind to her, according to his lights.” It was plain that the Vicar was
trying hard to be just. “At any rate, he was faithful to her; and she to him. They
wanted to marry. They always have wanted to marry. But I could not reconcile it
with my conscience to divorce her. Then last Tuesday—the night of the murder,
in fact …”
“Yes?” Rudge almost held his breath. At last something was going to come
out about that night’s hidden happenings.
“She called upon me here, quite late, and urged me once more to reconsider
my decision. She was very upset—agitated—quite distraught, in fact …”
“Ah!” breathed Rudge.
“I had the greatest difficulty in soothing her. Especially in view of what I had
to say.”
“You repeated your refusal, then?”
“What else could I do?” asked the Vicar piteously. “I considered that I had no
choice. The injunction is too explicit. It distressed me very much to have to say
so, but conscience,” added the Vicar, with a wan smile, “makes brave men of us
all.”
“And what time was this, sir, when the lady called?” It distressed the
Inspector too to have to continue his cross-examination in these circumstances,
but his duty was no less plain.
“I saw her soon after midnight.”
“But we have information that she arrived here at about eleven?” Rudge said
gently.

A slight flush appeared on the Vicar’s cheekbones. “I repeat, I saw her soon
after midnight. About a quarter past twelve, so far as I can say. I brought her into
the study here, and we talked for nearly an hour.”
“But what was she doing between eleven and a quarter past twelve?”
The Vicar’s lips stiffened. “That I cannot tell you, Inspector.”
“Meaning that you won’t tell me, sir, or you don’t know?”
“I have nothing further to say.”
The two men eyed each other steadily.
Rudge gave up the point. “And this afternoon? Had she made an appointment
with you?”
“She had, for seven o’clock, and with Mr. and Mrs. Holland too.
Unfortunately, most unfortunately, I was late. Otherwise,” said the Vicar, with a
little break in his voice, “who knows but what I might not have prevented—
this?”
“And you had been—?”
“At the Ferrers Abbas flower-show. The maids are there still, and my boys.
The house was quite empty.”
“Why did Mrs. Mount make this appointment?”
“She did not say, in so many words.”
“But you gathered, sir?”
“I think,” said the Vicar, a little uneasily, “that she had come to some decision
regarding certain information she considered she had concerning Admiral
Penistone’s death.”
“And that information is known to you?”
A look of obstinacy which Rudge in his exasperation characterised privately
as mulish, spread over the Vicar’s face. “I told you just now, Inspector, that on
some points my lips are sealed. That is one of them.”
Again the two looked at each other.
But this time an interruption came from without. Once more footsteps
sounded on the gravel drive, to be followed this time by the jangling in the back
regions of an old-fashioned bell.
The Vicar went out into the hall, and Rudge followed him.
Standing in the open front door was a small, elderly man, whose not very
spick-and-span suit was set off by a smart grey trilby hat set at a jaunty angle.
“Ah, Mount,” he said. “Sorry I’m so infernally late. Is the conference over?”
“Conference?” repeated the Vicar stupidly.
“Yes. Seven o’clock I was told to be here. I couldn’t quite make out what it
was about on the telephone, but the—the lady sounded pretty urgent.”
“She—rang you up?”

“Yes.” The new-comer looked more than a little embarrassed. “Sounded like a
cock-and-bull story to me. Well, she said she was your wife.”
“She was,” said the Vicar sombrely. He turned to Rudge. “Inspector, I don’t
think you know Sir Wilfrid Denny, do you?”
“By sight well enough, sir. I’m glad to see you’ve come back, Sir Wilfrid. I’ve
been hoping to have a word with you.”
“About this terrible business at Rundel Croft? Yes, of course. I got back this
afternoon. It never occurred to me that you’d want to see me, or I’d have come
back sooner. I had to go to Paris.”
“Denny …”
The Vicar was obviously going to break the news of the latest tragedy, and,
not wishing to intrude on the scene, Rudge turned away. Out of curiosity he
opened the door of the lavatory where the sick reporter had been parked, and
glanced inside. It was empty. Evidently he had recovered.
Before returning to the study to mount guard over the body and telephone to
the Super and Dr. Grice, Rudge indulged his curiosity once more. He took a
couple of steps outside the front door and glanced across the lawn. The result
gratified him. In the hammock sat Mr. and Mrs. Holland, side by side; Mr.
Holland’s arm was about his wife, and Mrs. Holland’s head was on her
husband’s shoulder. Even as Rudge glanced at them she raised it and
spontaneously kissed him.
“So she is human after all,” said Rudge to himself as he hurriedly turned
away. “And now she’s found out that she loved him all the time. Well, they say
it takes a shock to make some of ’em realise it.”

3
Rudge had handed over to Superintendent Hawkesworth.
Major Twyfitt, the Chief Constable, had motored back home, but luckily he
had not taken back Hawkesworth to the county town with him. Together the two,
as soon as Dr. Grice had arrived, had searched the house, but nothing had been
discovered to throw any further light on the death. The Superintendent was now
making arrangements for the removal of the body, and Rudge found himself at
liberty for a few words with Mr. and Mrs. Holland.
Mrs. Holland was still in the hammock. That she had received a severe shock
was obvious, but already she was showing such signs of recovery that Rudge,
who wished to put his questions while impressions were still strong, thought
himself justified in over-riding Holland’s objections to an immediate interview.
He dropped, with a carefully unofficial air, on the grass beside the pair.

“It’s unfortunate, sir, I agree. But you’ll understand that I must do my duty.
Now would you be good enough to tell me first of all what you know about this
appointment? When did Mrs. Mount make it, and what reason did she give?”
Rudge had addressed his question to Elma, but it was Holland who answered
it. “She rang us up at the Lord Marshall just after lunch to-day, and asked us to
meet her here. She gave no reason.”
“But you would have inferred one?”
“No.”
“Was it you who spoke to her on the telephone?”
“No,” said Holland—a little reluctantly, Rudge thought. “It was my wife.”
“I see.” Rudge turned pointedly to Mrs. Holland. “What reason did you infer
then, madam?”
“None.” Elma’s tone was as curt as ever.
“You did not ask for any?”
“No.”
“But it must have seemed strange to you that your late maid should want to
meet you at the Vicarage?”
“I imagined she was upset about something and wanted advice, and did not
care to come to the inn, where she might be recognised.”
“But why shouldn’t she be recognised?”
Elma shrugged her shoulders. “That I can’t tell you.”
“Did you know that she was Mrs. Mount?”
“Certainly not.”
“It surprises you?”
“Very much.”
“Perhaps,” said Rudge tentatively, “you can see some way in which that fact
may throw light on your uncle’s death?”
“I’m afraid I can’t,” Elma retorted. “But of course it gives a reason for her
having left me—my service so abruptly.”
Rudge nodded. “Yes, that’s true enough. By the way, you say you imagined
she was upset about something. Did she sound upset on the telephone?”
“Agitated, perhaps,” Elma said slowly. “Yes, she did.”
And yet not too agitated, Rudge thought, to eat greengages before the
conference she had called.
“It never occurred to you,” he went on, “that the advice you thought she
wanted might be on some matter connected with your uncle’s murder, Mrs.
Holland?”
“Certainly not,” Elma replied sharply. “Why should it?”
Rudge might have given more than one reason for his question. Instead, he

asked, slowly and significantly: “How much did Célie—know?”
His shot got home. Elma paled, then flushed, and sent a glance towards her
husband which was a patent appeal for help. Holland supplied it at once.
His words took Rudge by surprise. He did not bluster or attempt to end the
interview, merely remarking: “It’s curious you should say that, Inspector; I
asked my wife that identical question not an hour ago. I too had considered the
possibility that she might be about to give us some information on the Admiral’s
death. But my wife was positive she could have known nothing.”
“How could she?” asked Elma, in relieved tones.
Rudge glanced from one to the other. He knew very well that Mrs. Holland
had said nothing of the sort, at any rate just then. He was not sure that he had
been wise. In an attempt to frighten information out of them, he had intimated to
the pair that he had overheard their conversation while they were waiting; and
Holland, of course, had seen him come out of the bushes. They could not know
for certain that he had not been able to hear them too while Elma was in the
hammock. And yet Holland had not been in the least frightened. He had taken
the thing quietly out of Rudge’s hands, reassured his wife, and returned an
answer which was admirable in its noncommittal quality. Rudge had to console
himself with the fact that without doubt Elma had, just for an instant, lost her
grip. These two must know something—but Rudge recognised that there was not
the faintest hope of getting it out of them by direct questioning.
Anxious not to put them too much on their guard, he tried another line. “Now,
will you tell me, sir, exactly what happened when you got into the house? You
noticed the front door open, I think, and followed Mrs. Holland inside?”
Holland smiled slightly. “As you saw, Inspector, from your laurel bush, yes.
By the way,” he added, more sternly, “had you some idea that anything like that
was going to happen? Because if so …”
“I had no idea, sir; no more than yourself. Now, will you kindly give me those
facts?”
“Well, I followed my wife into the hall. We thought that Célie—Mrs. Mount
—must have come, as the door was ajar. We looked into the drawing-room first,
then the dining-room. I think it was while we were in the dining-room (which
adjoins the study, you know) that we heard a scream—”
“A terrible scream,” put in Mrs. Holland with a shudder.
“Yes, it was terrible. I’ve never heard anything so—well, awful—producing
awe. It was just like an animal. I dashed out of the dining-room and into the
study, but before I got there I heard a thud, which must have been made by her
fall. And there she was, on the carpet, and the blood streaming out. As I told
you, she died in my arms.”

“Oh-h-h-h-h-h,” shuddered Elma.
“I see. Thank you, sir. And you, Mrs. Holland? That coincides with your own
impressions?”
“Yes. I think so. Perhaps I should have said myself that we heard her fall
before my husband moved, but I couldn’t be sure.”
“But you think not, sir?”
Holland considered. “I couldn’t say. Perhaps. I suppose we stood still for a
few seconds. Sort of frozen, you know. Yes, perhaps we heard the thud before I
moved. I’m not sure we didn’t, now I come to think. But in any case there
couldn’t be more than a second and a half in it either way.”
“And then you followed your husband into the study, madam?”
“Yes,” Elma faltered. “And saw—and saw …” She covered her face with her
hands and her body shook.
Holland leapt up. “Inspector,” he said, in a low voice, “get out.”
Rudge got.
In any case he had not expected to learn anything more.

4
“Of course it’s suicide,” growled the Superintendent. “The doctor says her
grip on the dagger must have been applied during life; there’s only her prints on
it; the Hollands were within a few yards of the room when she did it, and
actually heard her fall; Rudge had command of the front door, and the back door
remained bolted on the inside, and when he searched the house there was no one
in it. How could it be anything but suicide?” The Superintendent spoke
scornfully.
Rudge said nothing, but his ruddy cheeks grew a shade ruddier still.
“You don’t agree, Rudge?” said the Chief Constable.
“No, sir, I’m afraid I don’t. The way I look at it is this. Would a woman going
to commit suicide fill up the time beforehand by eating greengages? It isn’t
natural.”
“Then are you saying Holland killed her?” asked the Superintendent sharply.
“Because there’s no one else who could.”
“No, sir, I’m not saying that either.”
It was the following morning, and a conference was being held at Whynmouth
police station. Already there was tension in the air, and further tension
threatened. The possibilities of Mrs. Mount’s death being due to suicide or
murder had been discussed already for at least half an hour, and no decision had
yet been reached. The Superintendent was all for suicide, and the Chief

Constable had to agree that the logic was on his side; Inspector Rudge
obstinately clung to murder, and when challenged to produce his proofs could
only mutter puerilities about things being “natural” or the reverse, and “feeling
things in his bones” no wonder the Superintendent snorted. Major Twyfitt had
persevered nobly in a Chief Constable’s first duty, that of holding the balance
between two disputing subordinates, but did not know how soon it might not
escape from his grasp.
He determined now to shift the ground of discussion. “Well, of course, Rudge,
if you feel that way you’ll do all you can to collect evidence to support your
ideas. Otherwise I think we can leave it for the time being to the coroner. Now,
about the murder of Admiral Penistone. You told us last night of the dead
woman’s identity with Célie Blanc, the lady’s maid, which does definitely
connect the Vicarage with the tragedy, as you’ve felt all along,” said the Chief
Constable soothingly. “And you told us about Hempstead’s discovery in the
bathroom at Rundel Croft. Now, have you any ideas where all this is going to
lead us?”
“I have, sir,” replied the Inspector grimly. “I’ve a very good idea indeed.”
“Ah, that’s good. What is it?”
“I’d rather not say, sir, if you don’t mind, until I’ve collected a little more
evidence,” Rudge answered, with a side-glance at the Superintendent.
“Yes, yes, of course. So long as you’re working on definite lines. Well, the
Superintendent has got the details from the Admiralty now about that episode at
Hong Kong, which you’d like to hear. Just let Rudge have the facts,
Superintendent.”
Superintendent Hawkesworth drew a folded paper from his breast-pocket,
opened it, and in a totally expressionless voice read:
“‘Captain Penistone was involved in a disgraceful scene in Hong Kong in
1911. By his own admission he followed a girl, who was being ill-treated by a
Chinaman, into a low-class den which was already unfavourably known to the
authorities. After that he stated that he remembered nothing further. He was,
however, seen, in an advanced state of intoxication, singing and dancing in the
company of a number of seamen of both British and other nationalities, and
Chinese coolies; and he was carried on board his ship the next morning, still
under the influence of drink and opium, by a party of his own men who had
recognised him the previous evening. In consideration of his record, Captain
Penistone was permitted to send in his papers instead of being tried by courtmartial. On the outbreak of hostilities with Germany, Captain Penistone
volunteered his services in any capacity, and in view of the emergency he was
reinstated temporarily with his rank of Captain. He served with distinction

throughout the War, and so far as the Admiralty was concerned, the regrettable
incident at Hong Kong was expunged from the records. The Admiral, however,
expressed to several of the senior officers here his dissatisfaction with the affair,
and his belief that a good deal more lay behind it than had ever appeared, and he
used to state his intention of devoting his leisure on retirement to getting to the
bottom of it; but as to whether there were any grounds or evidence for this belief,
nothing is known here.’”
“I see,” said Rudge. “Followed a girl in, did he? Well, that clears up one point,
sir, doesn’t it? File X!”
“You mean, File X contained the evidence he had collected to support his
view that the incident was rigged?” nodded the Chief Constable. “Yes, that’s the
view we’d come to.”
“And it gives you something else, Rudge,” added Hawkesworth. “It gives you
motive. Those papers had disappeared from the folder, hadn’t they? Obviously
they were taken after the murder, by the murderer. In other words, the Admiral
was right. He’d got his evidence—and it was going to implicate somebody who
didn’t want to be implicated. So the Admiral was murdered to stop him blowing
the gaff. Well, that gives us a pretty strong pointer. The murderer is a man who
was in Hong Kong in 1911. Anything wrong with that?”
“Nothing,” Rudge agreed. “That’s right enough, sir. Must be. But there’s one
thing I can’t understand, and that’s Mr. Holland’s story about seeing the
Admiral, in his study, with a lot of papers on his desk, after midnight that night.
According to what the doctor says, that’s just the time the murderer ought to
have been looking for File X.”
“And perhaps so he was,” said the Superintendent darkly.
“If you mean Holland, sir,” said Rudge, returning to an old difficulty, “why
did he want to come out with that story at all, when there was no evidence that
he wasn’t safe in bed and asleep at the Lord Marshall?”
“I don’t mean Holland,” snapped the Superintendent. “I mean the man
Holland saw. The man whom he mistook for the Admiral. The man who was
impersonating the Admiral—for the third time.”
“The third time?”
“Yes. Once in the study, once at the Lord Marshall, and once—in Hong
Kong!”
“Oh!” Rudge registered such genuine admiration that the Superintendent
forgave him his foolishness about Mrs. Mount. “That’s a smart bit of work, sir, if
I may say so.”
“You can bank on it, that’s the murderer,” said the Superintendent
complacently, and his tone added that that was not the end of the smart work.

“But wait a bit,” cried the Inspector excitedly. “That means Mrs. Holland’s in
it. Holland gave it away that she was in the study too.”
“And haven’t you thought all the time that Mrs. Holland knew a good bit
more than she let on?”
“I never thought she was actually mixed up in the murder,” Rudge confessed.
With an air of triumph the Superintendent rose and unlocked a cupboard.
From it he produced a package, and from the package a white chiffon frock. His
large hands looked absurdly incongruous on the delicate stuff as he draped the
dress over the back of a chair before the eyes of the Inspector. His reason for
doing so was plain; there was no need for him to point to the rusty-coloured stain
that smeared one hip. “The missing white dress. Got a warrant to search her
room at the Lord Marshall, and found it at the bottom of a drawer,” he said
briefly.
“I knew she knew something!” exclaimed Rudge.
“Why do people keep damning evidence against themselves?” Major Twyfitt
asked.
“Lucky for us they do, sir,” said Hawkesworth. To Rudge he added: “Mind
you, I don’t think she was in it from the start. But she’s an accessory after, all
right. And that gives us another pointer. See it?”
“Oh, yes,” nodded Rudge. “The brother, Walter. I’ve had him in mind from
the beginning.”
“You have, eh?” said the Superintendent, somewhat discomfited. “Why didn’t
you ever say so, then?”
“No evidence,” replied Rudge smugly.
“Anyhow, it seems clear enough now,” interposed the Chief Constable. “We
can assume, I think, that if anyone has been impersonating the Admiral, either in
Hong Kong or here, it must have been this Walter Fitzgerald. There must have
been a strong resemblance. We’ve got evidence of that too, Rudge. Two
witnesses who saw a man in Whynmouth on the day of the murder whom they
mistook in the distance for the Admiral, and only realised when they were quite
close that it was a younger man.”
“Yes, sir? And that gives me another idea. May I put through a telephone call
to London?”
“Of course.”
Rudge consulted his notebook, and then gave the number of Friedlander’s
Hotel and asked for priority. The connection was made in less than two minutes.
Rudge explained who he was, and said: “You remember telling me that Mrs.
Arkwright only had one regular visitor, a tall man with a bronzed forehead? Did
this man wear a beard? He did? Thank you.” He rang off.

The other two looked at him enquiringly.
“That connects up something more.” Rudge was unable to conceal his
satisfaction. “The man who ran off with Mrs. Mount, the man whose name the
Vicar never knew—that was Walter Fitzgerald too.”
“Ah!” said two breaths simultaneously.
“It’s beginning to work in.”
The Superintendent cleared his throat. “Now, my theory of what happened
that night is this. This man, this Walter Fitzgerald, came down—Yes? What is
it? Oh, come in.” A loud knock at the door had broken him off in mid-sentence.
Police Constable Hempstead entered, looking thoroughly pleased with
himself. In his hand he held a short length of manilla rope, knotted to another
short length. “Hope I’m not disturbing you, sir,” he said to Major Twyfitt, “but
thought you’d like to know at once. I’ve searched both banks thoroughly this
morning, from Rundel Croft to the sea, and found nothing except this.”
“The missing bit of the painter!” exclaimed Rudge. “Where was it? Sorry,
sir,” he added perfunctorily to the Chief Constable, who nodded goodhumouredly.
“Caught up in some bushes, ’bout half-way down, on the Vicarage side.”
“Good man,” said the Chief Constable as he took the rope, and even
Hawkesworth grunted approval.
“Did you make any enquiries at the cottages?” asked Rudge.
“Every one, sir. Nobody heard or saw anything. But I’ve found out something
else.”
“You have, eh? What?”
“Well, you remember that set of photos you gave me, sir, of the finger-prints
on the oars in the Admiral’s boat? Well, I believe I’ve identified them.”
Hempstead produced a piece of paper, which the Superintendent took before
anyone else could reach it.
He whipped another set of the photographs out of his pocket and pored over
them for a minute. Then he looked up. “That’s the man. Who is it, Hempstead?”
Hempstead beamed with self-importance. “Neddy Ware, sir.”

5
When Rudge left the police station for a belated lunch he had a good deal to
think about. The business was getting altogether too wide-spread for his liking.
Half the inhabitants of Lingham seemed now to be implicated in the murder, or
at the least accessories after it. The Vicar, Elma Holland, and now Neddy Ware.
There was another point against Neddy Ware too. The plaster casts which had

been taken of the footprints on the bank showed a number which had been
definitely identified as the Admiral’s, several of his niece’s, and just a few of a
large, coarse sole, studded with nails, which could belong to nobody at Rundel
Croft but a gardener; but they might belong to Neddy Ware. The impressions
were good, and the Super was going to find out himself, after lunch, whether
they were Neddy Ware’s or not; but no one had any doubt now on the point.
He had been cunning, had Neddy Ware. The Inspector ruefully acknowledged
to himself that he had been completely taken in by the old man. Neddy Ware had
given him precisely correct information on all matters concerning the river and
its tides which he could have checked from anyone else who was familiar with
them; even on points which might have told against himself he had been
accurate; but what about his speculations, which the Inspector had unconsciously
put on practically the same basis as the rest? It was difficult now to disentangle
speculation from fact, even in consultation with his notebook, but there seemed
to Rudge two main ideas which Ware had deftly given him and which had lain in
his mind ever since as a basis on which any theory of the crime must be founded:
that if the Admiral had taken his boat out at all that night he must have taken it
down-stream, and that it would have taken him an hour to row to Whynmouth.
How did these two ideas look now?
For the first there really seemed no reason at all. Why must the Admiral have
gone down-stream? So that the abandoned boat could have drifted to where it
was found at the time it was found. But was it found at that time? And at that
place? The whole of Ware’s first story must now be viewed with the deepest
suspicion.
What about the second point, then? From Rundel Croft to Whynmouth, by
water, was about two and three-quarter miles. The Admiral must have started at
between a quarter-past and half-past ten. At that time the tide was, even
according to Ware’s own information, at its strongest ebb. Could a lusty man not
row a boat, with a swiftly flowing tide to help him, at faster than a slow walking
pace? Nonsense; of course he could. Twice as fast. Very well, then. Neddy Ware
had wanted to deceive the police as to the time the Admiral could have reached
Whynmouth that night (assuming for the moment that on the other point he had
been speaking the truth, and it was down-stream the Admiral had gone). Now
why the deuce had he wanted to do that?
At this point the Inspector mechanically pushed his full plate of gooseberry
pie away from him and allowed one of his landlady’s best efforts to get stone
cold.
There were only two possible reasons that Rudge could see; one, that
somebody had an alibi for half-past eleven, but not for eleven o’clock; and the

other, to make the police think that the man who called at the Lord Marshall just
after eleven was an impostor—which was exactly what they did think. But in
that case the man really was the Admiral. …
This was getting altogether too difficult. Rudge noted the point for future
reference, and followed another line.
There was another advantage too in shifting forward the time of events by half
an hour or so. Just after midnight the brother, Walter Fitzgerald, had been in the
Admiral’s study. This extra half-hour gave him plenty of time to get there, break
the news to his sister, and begin his search for File X, by midnight. Without it,
Rudge had found the time-table exceedingly cramped.
Well, there already were the answers to any number of his thirty-nine articles
of doubt. Rudge turned them up in his notebook and glanced through them, to
see whether this intervention of Neddy Ware’s cleared up any more puzzles.
It did, at once. 26: Why was the Admiral wearing a coat? Rudge remembered
the difficulty. If it was the Admiral who had taken out his boat that night, and a
fairly warm night at that, why wear a coat for hard rowing? But suppose it was
not the Admiral who had been doing the rowing. Suppose it was Neddy Ware,
who had not only brought the boat back but had taken it out too, with the
Admiral as a passenger. There was a profitable line of enquiry. If only that were
true, Neddy Ware must know not only where the Admiral had gone, but who had
killed him. But how on earth to find out if it were true? Because quite certainly
Neddy Ware would not give himself away on that point.
Well, there was only one possibility. The Vicar had been sitting in his
summer-house. He might have seen. Rudge had had a suspicion already that the
Vicar had seen something from that summer-house. Well, the Vicar had got to
be made to speak, that was all.
Falling at last on his gooseberry pie, Rudge swept the plate clean in half a
dozen gargantuan mouthfuls, followed them with a couple of bites of bread and
cheese, and ran down to the street and his car.
Mr. Mount was in, and had just finished his own lunch. He received the
Inspector in his study.
Rudge came to the point at once. “Sorry to bother you again, sir, but we’ve
information that Admiral Penistone left Rundel Croft in his boat, at about tenfifteen. You were sitting in your summer-house at that time, overlooking the
river. Did you see him leave?”
The Vicar answered at once. “Since you ask me the direct question, Inspector:
yes, I did.”
“Thank you, sir. Is it any good my asking why you didn’t let me have this
information sooner? Although I never actually asked you, you must have known

it would be very valuable.”
“Certainly, I will tell you. It was because I feared that my knowledge might
lead you to suspect an innocent man.”
“I see, sir. Then you know who murdered Admiral Penistone?”
“No,” the Vicar retorted, “I don’t. But I’m pretty sure who didn’t.”
“Well, we’ll leave that. Which way did the Admiral head, sir? Up-stream or
down?”
“Down.”
“And Neddy Ware was rowing him?”
The Vicar looked first startled, and then distressed. “Inspector, if you suspect
old Ware of—”
“I don’t, sir. Not of the murder.”
“I have your word?”
“You have, Mr. Mount.”
“Very well. Then I will admit to you that Ware was rowing the Admiral that
night; and extremely surprised I was to see it. I had no idea they were even
acquainted. But that is the reason why I said nothing of what I saw. We parsons
have to rely a good deal on our estimate of people’s natures, you know, and I
would stake everything I have on the fact that old Ware is totally incapable of
anything of that kind. I’ve known him ever since he came to Lingham, you see,
so I feared that this information of mine would put you on an entirely wrong
scent. I therefore determined to volunteer nothing myself, but to use what
influence I may have with Ware to induce him to come to you of his own accord
and give you a full account of his own knowledge of that night’s happenings,
whatever it may be. I may say I have quite failed.”
“He told you he wouldn’t come to us?”
“More than that. He denies that he was in the boat at all; he says that I was
mistaken.”
“We have quite definite evidence that he was, sir; his finger-prints on the
oars.”
“Yes, I was quite sure I was right.”
“Well, we must tackle Ware ourselves.”
“I doubt whether you’ll get much out of him.”
“We shall see, sir. In the meantime, are you sure there isn’t anything else
you’d like to tell us yourself, sir, about that night—without necessarily
incriminating anyone?”
“Nothing,” said the Vicar firmly.

6

Rudge left the Vicarage in some elation. Not only had his surmise been
confirmed that Ware was rowing the boat, but definite evidence was at last
forthcoming that it had headed down-stream. Curious that old Ware had been so
insistent on that point too. Except for the single suggestion about the length of
time needed for the journey, it seemed as if Ware had not been trying to deceive
him at all—almost as if he had been attempting to put him on the right track.
Was it possible that Neddy Ware’s guilty knowledge sat heavily upon him, that
he thoroughly wanted the Admiral’s murderer to be caught, but that at the same
time, like a schoolboy, he would not directly give him away? When one came to
think of it, that really was the only explanation of his behaviour. But if so it was
a pity in a way; for Rudge knew Neddy Ware well enough to be quite certain
that if the old man had made up his mind not to give the murderer away, no
possible means could be found of making him do so.
Anyhow, one could but try. Hastily obtaining permission from Major Twyfitt
for the interview, and learning at the same time that the theory of the footprints
had been proved correct, Rudge drove out to Ware’s cottage.
The old man was sunning himself in the garden, and seemed thoroughly
pleased to see his visitor.
“Well, Mr. Rudge, still puzzled about them tides?”
Rudge sat down on the same bench. “No, Ware; it’s not the tides this time; it’s
something more serious. I want you to tell me what you were doing in the
Admiral’s company last Tuesday night—the night he was murdered?”
Old Ware looked the picture of innocent astonishment. “Me? I wasn’t in his
company. Whatever put that idea in your head, Mr. Rudge? I didn’t even know
him by sight. Didn’t I tell you the next day I hadn’t recognised him?”
“You did, and I’m afraid I can’t believe you. Especially as you were in Hong
Kong when there was that scandal about him, so you must have known all about
that though you never let on a word. Now look here, Ware, I’m not threatening
you, mind; I wouldn’t do anything like that; but at the same time I’m ready to
tell you that we’ve got evidence that you called for Admiral Penistone at Rundel
Croft last Tuesday evening and rowed him down-stream at a quarter past tea.
And what’s more, I’ll tell you what the evidence is: you were seen starting,
there’s your finger-prints on the oars, and there’s your footprints on the bank. So
you see there’s no getting away from it. Now I needn’t tell you this puts you in a
nasty position. Mind you, I don’t think you had anything to do with the murder,
but there’s others who might.”
“I’m glad you don’t think I had anything to do with the murder, Mr. Rudge,”
said Ware dryly.

“But there’s others who might,” repeated Rudge, “and will, too, unless you
tell us all you know about that evening. Now come, Ware.”
Neddy Ware drew a moment or two at his pipe before he spoke. “You’re
pretty sure it was murder, eh, Mr. Rudge?”
“Well, you don’t imagine it’s suicide, do you? And I’m afraid I can’t see how
that knife could have got into his chest by accident. Accident, suicide, or murder,
it’s got to be one of those three.”
“Oh, no, it hasn’t,” retorted Ware. “Not by a long chalk it hasn’t.”
“What do you mean? Are you saying that the Admiral’s death wasn’t due to
either accident, suicide, or murder?”
“Me? I’m not saying anything. That’s your job, to find out what the Admiral
died from. All I’m saying is that every death isn’t due to one of those three.
What about hanging a man, eh? What’s that, Mr. Rudge—accident, suicide, or
murder?”
“Well, never mind that,” said Rudge impatiently. “What I want to know is,
what did you do last Tuesday evening, and where did you take the Admiral? And
I needn’t repeat what I said about it being in your own interests to tell me.”
Again Ware paused before replying, so long that the Inspector began to think
that he was never going to reply at all; but at crucial moments such as these he
had learnt that silent patience was the best policy.
At last the old man took the pipe out of his mouth. “This woman, now. What’s
all this about her? They’re saying she’s Mr. Mount’s wife, and there’s others
saying she was the Frenchy maid that the Admiral’s niece had.”
“She’s both,” said Rudge, shortly, annoyed at this side-track but thinking it
best not to bustle the old man. Rudge was something of a fisherman himself.
“Is she? That’s queer now. And killed herself, they say.”
Ware turned round suddenly and looked full at the Inspector. “Is that true, Mr.
Rudge? Did she kill herself? What is it this time, eh? Accident, suicide, or
murder?”
“The Super and Major Twyfitt are satisfied it’s suicide,” said Rudge, and did
not add that he was not.
“Ah!” said Ware, and returned to his pipe again.
Once more the Inspector reminded himself that patience is a virtue.
And then Neddy Ware did a thing which surprised his listener. He voluntarily
returned to the subject of his own doings. “So you want to know about me, Mr.
Rudge? Well, seeing you know so much, perhaps I’d better tell you. I would
have told you before, but it seemed better to say nothing about it, in case you
might get foolish ideas into your head about me. That’s why I said the next
morning I didn’t know him. Well, I did call for the Admiral, like you said. He’d

offered me five shillings that afternoon, seeing me fishing near his place, to row
him down to Whynmouth after late dinner, him not wanting to do any hard work
with the oars just after eating a lot, you understand.”
“And where did you take him?” Rudge asked eagerly.
“Why, where he wanted to go—Whynmouth. I put him ashore at the steps,
and he asked me the quickest way to reach the Lord Marshall. And that’s the last
I see of him.”
“You didn’t wait for him?” Rudge said, disappointed.
“I did not. He said he’d be late, and come back likely by motor.”
“You left the boat, and walked back?”
“I did not. I rowed it back, and put it in the boat-house for him all ship shape.”
“Which end first?”
“I can’t say that. Probably bow. That comes easier. Why, Mr. Rudge?”
“Oh, nothing. Do anything else?”
“I give her a bit of a swab out before I left her, that’s all.”
“What time did you get to Whynmouth?”
“Couldn’t say for certain. ’Bout eleven, I suppose.”
“And you rowed the boat back nearly three miles against the tide. How long
did that take you?”
“Not much under two hours. Must have been—yes, nigh on one o’clock (your
time) before I berthed her.”
“And then you walked straight back to your cottage?”
“I did, Mr. Rudge. And that’s all I know. So I’m glad you don’t suspect me of
murdering the Admiral, whatever others may think.”
Rudge persevered for some little time longer, but could get no further
information. As he returned to his car he was not altogether satisfied with what
he had got. How far could Neddy Ware be trusted? If one accepted his story it
seemed proved that the man who visited the Lord Marshall that night really was
the Admiral: and that might well be the case. But the rest of the story did not
seem to ring quite so true. Would it be likely, for instance, that the Admiral
would saddle Ware with that two-hour pull back against the tide for the sake of
the forty-minute run down with it? It was possible, of course, but somehow the
Inspector had a strong feeling that it was here that Ware’s story left the rails of
truth. He was pretty sure that the old man had not told all he knew. Why, for
instance, after getting to bed so late, was he up and fishing at such an early hour
the next morning? It almost looked as if he knew what he was going to catch.
But for the present at any rate there was nothing to be done about it: and at
least Rudge thought he might now take it as established that it was to
Whynmouth that the Admiral had gone that night. But whom to see?

Whom but—his murderer?
Walter Fitzgerald had been in Whynmouth. With any luck he had been staying
there, and could thus be traced. It was to Whynmouth that every signpost seemed
now to be pointing: and it was towards Whynmouth accordingly that Inspector
Rudge now headed his shabby little two-seater.

7
Nevertheless his journey thither was occupied by reflections of a matter alien
to his errand. The more he thought about it the less satisfied he was that Mrs.
Mount’s death was due to suicide, as the Super and Major Twyfitt were so
comfortably convinced. The matter of the freshly-eaten greengages was only one
of a dozen indications, slight enough in themselves but in the aggregate
formidable, that suicide had never been intended. It was quite obvious that Mrs.
Mount had been mixed up somehow in the Admiral’s murder. At any rate she
must have known a good deal about it—too much, Rudge fancied, for its
perpetrator. Her suicide was really too fortunate, for him, to be true. And
especially just before that conference which she herself had summoned, and at
which without the smallest doubt she intended to shift at any rate some of the
burden of knowledge from her own shoulders. Would it be likely that after
summoning her husband, the Hollands and Sir Wilfrid Denny, Mrs. Mount
should intend to confront them with nothing less than her own corpse? That
would have been a grim joke indeed: but Mrs. Mount had not been a grim lady.
No, it was altogether too lucky for Walter Fitzgerald that she should have died
when she did.
But how had he managed it? There the Inspector had to admit himself
completely at a loss. As soon as his telephone messages had brought relief, he
and the Superintendent had searched the house from attic to cellar, and had
found nothing. Moreover, he was satisfied that nobody had escaped while he was
still confined to the neighbourhood of the study. He had had both the front door
and the kitchen regions continuously under his eye, to say nothing of the drive. If
Walter Fitzgerald really had done the thing, he had done it exceedingly cleverly.
All the way to Whynmouth the Inspector beat his brains against this stone
wall.
Nor did he have any better luck on his other errand. Though he spent the
entire afternoon calling personally at every hotel, inn, public-house, and
apartment-house in the place, no trace could he find of his bearded quarry. It
seemed that the man had not been staying in Whynmouth at all.
Well, it did not really matter. The Admiral must have arranged to meet him

there: but that did not necessarily mean that he would be staying there. It was
quite possible to understand why the rendezvous had not been arranged for
Rundel Croft; no doubt the Admiral would not have him in the place.
Rudge began to regret his lack of information about this nephew. It seemed
impossible to get a line on the fellow from any angle. It was worse than useless
to apply to the only person who could give any really valuable information, Mrs.
Holland. Besides, in her present rôle of accessory after the fact Mrs. Holland
herself was once more in the limelight of suspicion. The only possible hope was
Sir Wilfrid Denny.
Rudge put his car up in Whynmouth and had himself ferried across the river to
West End.
Sir Wilfrid was in his garden, syringing his roses for green fly with tobacco
juice. A rose lover himself, Rudge was interested to notice now that the little
rose-garden was the only part of the grounds which did not wear the same air of
neglect.
Sir Wilfrid greeted him with a nod. “Afternoon, Inspector. I was rather
expecting you to-day. Look—did you ever see anything more lovely?” He
cupped a half-opened Emma Wright in two fingers and turned it towards the
Inspector.
“Beautiful, sir,” agreed the latter wholeheartedly.
“But she loses her colour almost as soon as she opens,” mourned Sir Wilfrid.
“That’s the worst of these modern roses—at least, I class her with the moderns.
They don’t keep their colour. Give me the old-fashioned ones. That pink over
there now. There’s no modern variety to come anywhere near it, in the pinks.”
“Madam Abel always has been a favourite of mine,” Rudge nodded.
Sir Wilfrid beamed up at him. “You’re a rose enthusiast too, Inspector? That’s
magnificent. I’ll take you round. This is my latest importation. Mrs. G. A. van
Rossem. Know her? I can’t say I’m altogether satisfied. The usual mix-up of
colours they seem to like so much nowadays. I must say I prefer my roses selfcoloured. Mabel Morse, now. … Eh? Don’t you agree?”
“Yes, I do, sir. Entirely. I think you’re quite right. But to tell you the truth, I
came to see you about something rather different.”
“Ah, yes,” Sir Wilfrid nodded, descending to earth. “Poor Admiral Penistone.
I remember; you said you wanted to ask me something. Yes?”
“It’s about his nephew. Walter Fitzgerald. Can you give me any information
about him?”
“Walter Fitzgerald?” Sir Wilfrid looked puzzled. “No, I don’t really think I
can. Of course, Inspector, I never knew the Admiral really well. We’d been
acquaintances for a very long time, but I can’t say that we ever got much beyond

that stage. I imagine,” Sir Wilfrid added with a slight smile, “that few people
did, with Admiral Penistone.”
“You were in Hong Kong when he was stationed there, sir, weren’t you?”
Sir Wilfrid nodded gravely. “Yes, I was. And when a certain incident took
place. But no doubt you know all about that already?”
“Yes, we’ve heard about that. Did the Admiral ever refer to that incident to
you, sir?”
“He did. Frequently,” replied Sir Wilfrid dryly.
“Yes, I understand it was a bit of a bee in his bonnet. Do you agree with his
idea, sir, that there was a good deal more behind it than ever came out?”
“I wish I could,” said Sir Wilfrid, looking a little distressed. “But the facts
were too plain. And I happen to know the authorities made a very searching
investigation. It was always my belief that this idea of Admiral Penistone’s was
due to a kind of obstinate pride. It was his one lapse, you see, in a thoroughly
honourable life; and he simply refused to face it.”
“Then you don’t fancy there was any possibility of the Admiral’s having been
impersonated on that occasion?”
“None. To anyone with even as little acquaintance as myself of service
conditions, the notion’s simply moonshine. Why, there were some of his own
men there. How could they have been mistaken? No, I’m sorry to have to say so,
Inspector, but Captain Penistone had no one else to thank but himself for the
affair. That was the opinion of everyone on the spot. But in any case, this is all
old history. It can’t have anything to do with his death.”
“No, of course not,” said the Inspector tactfully. “Then you can’t give me any
information about the nephew, which is what I really came to see you about?
You knew he was in Hong Kong at about that time too?”
“By Jove, I remember now. Yes, he did come to dine with us once. A tall,
good-looking fellow. I remember. Pleasant chap, too. I heard he’d rather gone to
the dogs, afterwards. Pity.”
“Had he a beard, sir?”
“A beard?” repeated Sir Wilfrid, puzzled. “I don’t think so. I don’t really
remember. Why?”
“Oh, just a small point. Then you never saw him again?”
“No, I think he only came once. But I wouldn’t swear. We used to entertain
such a lot in those days,” said Sir Wilfrid, rather ruefully. “He might have come
again, but I don’t remember it.”
“I see, sir. Thank you. Now there’s one other point. Were you by any chance
in the garden here last Tuesday evening?”
“The night of Admiral Penistone’s death? Yes, almost certainly; though again

I couldn’t swear to it. But unless it’s raining, I always have a stroll round the
roses after dinner. So far as I remember it wasn’t raining that night, so I expect I
did. Why do you ask?”
“Because we have information that the Admiral landed from his boat at
Whynmouth steps at about eleven o’clock that night, and as you know, they’re
almost opposite this garden. I was wondering if by any lucky chance you’d seen
him and could confirm that?”
“No,” said Sir Wilfrid decidedly. “Not so late as that, I’m afraid. And I’m
pretty sure I had a couple of friends in that night. (Funny, isn’t it, how hard it is
to say for certain what one was doing only a week ago?) But what’s all this
about the Admiral being seen in Whynmouth that night? I’d gathered he was
killed up-stream somewhere.”
“Why did you think that, sir?”
“Well, I don’t know. Wasn’t the boat floating down-stream at four in the
morning? I took it for granted that must have meant it had been up-stream.”
With a slightly superior air the Inspector explained the tidal vagaries of the
River Whyn, and pointed his remarks by accompanying Sir Wilfrid over his own
rather dishevelled lawn to the water’s edge and illustrating his meaning on the
spot. Sir Wilfrid, a somewhat mild little man, had the air of promising to know
better next time.
Having delivered his lesson, the Inspector took his leave, with the unhappy
reflection that he had really learned nothing at all from his visit. Sir Wilfrid’s
private opinion regarding the Superintendent’s “smart piece of work” could
hardly be called information.
Having walked, in full view of his host, out through the main entrance,
Inspector Rudge doubled round to the back one. There he learned, after judicious
and veiled questioning, that so far as was known Sir Wilfrid had not left the
house at all last Tuesday evening, but had had two friends in to see him.
“Leastways, the decanter had gone down by a tidy bit, it had, and there was three
glasses to wash up the next morning, to say nothing of more cigarette-ends in the
ash-trays than any one man could smoke, so it looks as if there was, don’t it?”
Rudge agreed that it did.
As has been said before, Inspector Rudge left nothing to chance.

8
Rudge called in at the police station in Whynmouth before going back to his
lodgings, and found that Sergeant Appleton had telephoned through his report
from London. He had had no difficulty in obtaining information about Holland.

Holland, it seemed, was thoroughly well known in his own line. Several
important men had spoken of him to Appleton in the highest, not to say flowery,
terms. He was known, apparently, not only all over the East but in London too as
the very best type of trading Englishman—energetic, determined, dead honest
and reliable, the sort of man whose word it was never necessary to obtain in
writing; what he promised, he performed, and what he performed he performed
just a shade better than anyone else. Appleton had been impressed, and said so
frankly.
About the marriage too there was no room for doubt. It had been performed at
a registry office in the West End, and Appleton had inspected the register and
spoken with the registrar, who had described husband and wife exactly; he had
taken particular notice of them, he said, because they were both so out of the
ordinary type.
“Humph!” said Rudge to himself. “And yet according to the Super he’s an
accessory after. At least his wife is, which almost always means the same thing.
Something funny somewhere.”
He went back to his supper.
As usual he ruminated during the solitary meal. On the whole he was not
dissatisfied with his day’s work. It had not been true that he had learned nothing
from Sir Wilfrid Denny. Going over the conversation again in his mind Rudge
fancied that he had learned one thing of real value, which might lead to quite
remarkable results—so remarkable, indeed, that when Rudge first began to
realise their possibilities he feared that his imagination, goaded by the events of
the last week, was running hopelessly away with him. And yet …
But it was useless to speculate. He must shelve that line of enquiry until there
was evidence to support it. In the meantime he would turn his thoughts to the
death of Mrs. Mount.
There was one point which told badly against murder, and Superintendent
Hawkesworth had, of course, made the most of it. According to the doctor, if
Mrs. Mount had been stabbed by some other person, her murderer could not
have escaped being spattered, and liberally, too, with blood; her clothing had
been of the flimsiest; it would have interposed only a feeble barrier against the
stream of blood that must have spurted from a wound in such a position—as
indeed the condition of the carpet plainly showed. And yet not a single person so
stained had been seen by anyone. Therefore, argued the Superintendent,
contemptuously logical, no such person existed.
Rudge, still obstinately fixed in his idea of murder, thought now that he saw a
way round this difficulty; and it was a way, too, which might be made to carry
several other of the peculiar circumstances of the death. Perfectly simple too:

Mrs. Mount had been stabbed from behind, not from in front at all. And that
argued that her murderer must be a man. But of this the Inspector was already
convinced. If he was right and Mrs. Mount really had been murdered, the man
who had killed her was the same as the murderer of Admiral Penistone. Rudge
had no doubt at all about that. And he had killed her to close her mouth, which
she was just about to open against him.
From the weapon, that usually hopeful source of enquiry, nothing could be
learned. Mr. Mount had identified at once the knife that had been drawn from his
wife’s breast as his own, a steel paper-knife with a pointed end which lay
habitually on the desk in his study. The only argument from that fact was that
murder had not been intended from the first; circumstances had arisen in the
course of the interview that must have taken place, which had made murder
imperative. But it was not an argument on which one could really rely.
As to the Superintendent’s chief objection to the theory of murder, namely,
that murder was impossible since no murderer could have got away and yet no
murderer had been found, Rudge was not disposed to bother too much about
that. He already had a theory to account for that. Rudge did not believe that the
murderer had got away at all.
His meal finished, he got up from the table and began to wander aimlessly
about the room. He felt restless. Something must be done, and he did not know
quite what. Finally he went down to his car and drove out to Rundel Croft. He
would smoke a quiet pipe in the boat-house, looking out over the river, and see if
that would help matters.
It did, but the pipe was hardly needed. Quite automatically the Inspector, as
soon as he arrived in the boat-house, cast an official eye over the Admiral’s
skiff, and something took that same eye immediately. Caught in between two of
the planks in the bow was something of a vivid red colour. Rudge bent over it. It
was a head of valerian, drooping and sad, but not withered.
“Humph!” said Rudge.
This was extremely interesting. He knew where he had seen valerian last: that
very afternoon, in Sir Wilfrid Denny’s garden. There was a big clump of it
growing close to the water, at one end of the landing-stage. And, so far as Rudge
knew, there was no other on the river. But the really interesting thing was that
this head had not been there when the boat was examined on the morning after
the murder (Appleton would never have missed it in any case), as indeed its
comparatively fresh condition showed. There were only two possible inferences:
one, that the boat had been taken out to-day and had picked up the flower by
accident, and the other that the latter had been deliberately placed there.
Rudge considered these for a moment; then he picked the flower out. The

stem came out in a straight line from the little crevice in which it had been
lodged; by no possible chance could it have got in there just like that as the boat
brushed past the clump. The second inference was the correct one: somebody
was trying to throw suspicion upon Sir Wilfrid Denny.
Rudge became very active. He knew perfectly well who had put that piece of
valerian in the boat. He went up tc the house. Constable Hempstead was there,
cherishing busily as usual. Rudge asked one question of the company assembled
in the kitchen, and it was Constable Hempstead who was able to answer it.
“Has that reporter from the Evening Gazette been up here to-day?”
“Yes, sir. I saw him from the other bank this morning. Near the boat-house, he
was.”
Rudge took his car, drove as fast as he dared to the nearest magistrate, and
obtained a search-warrant. Then he headed for the Lord Marshall.
“Is that reporter from the Evening Gazette in?” he asked the porter.
“Mr. Graham? No, Mr. Rudge. He went out after dinner.”
“What’s the number of his room?”
“Seventeen.”
“Thanks. No, don’t come up. And say nothing about this to anyone.”
The porter nodded importantly.
Rudge was busy for over half an hour, undisturbed. When he left, however, he
had in his pocket nothing but a piece of paper on which he had laboriously typed
a few sentences from a portable typewriter which stood on a table near the
window.
As he passed unobtrusively out into the street he looked about him. On the
other side of the road a man was lounging. Rudge nodded to him, and the other
followed him round a corner.
“They’re both in,” he said in a low tone, as he reached the Inspector. “Had
their dinner there, and haven’t been out since.” Since the discovery of the bloodstained frock, Mr. and Mrs. Holland had been placed by Superintendent
Hawkesworth under close observation.
Rudge nodded. “Never mind about them. I want you to look after somebody
else. That reporter chap from the Evening Gazette. Know him?”
“Him with the short hair and the spectacles?”
“Yes. Calls himself Graham.”
“Isn’t that his real name, then, Mr. Rudge?”
“It is not. His real name,” said Rudge, “is Walter Fitzgerald.”

9

“You should have rung me up last night, Rudge,” said Major Twyfitt severely.
“Or at least you should have got in touch with the Superintendent. The fellow
might have got away.”
“I had a man at the back of the Lord Marshall as well as the front all night,
sir,” pleaded Rudge.
The Superintendent said nothing, but his look was voluble.
“How long have you known this man Graham was Fitzgerald?”
“Not definitely till I identified that specimen of typing I took in his room as
coming from the same machine that typed the Admiral’s consent to Mrs.
Holland’s marriage. Of course, I suspected it before,” said Rudge, with a sideglance at the Superintendent, “as soon as I heard about Hempstead finding those
remains of a beard in the washbasin trap at Rundel Croft; because I remembered
that this reporter’s face was a good deal lighter round the chin than on the
forehead. I thought at first that he’d been dosing himself with some kind of
sunburn application.”
“And you say you rang up the Evening Gazette last night?”
“Yes, sir; and he’s their man all right. And he had a beard when they saw him
last. The editor told me he’s not their real crime expert. He’s ill as it happens, so
when Fitzgerald rang them up on the morning after the murder to tell them he
was on the spot and ask if he could cover it, they said he could, though I gather
he wasn’t on their salary-list before. Sort of freelance contributor, but they liked
his stuff. ‘Graham’ was the name he wrote under.”
“Yes; that gave him an excuse to be on the spot and keep in touch with
developments of course. Very handy, from his point of view. He doesn’t know
you suspect him? You’re sure of that?”
“I’ve got no reason to think he does, sir.”
“Well, let’s hope he doesn’t,” said the Superintendent with energy. “Because
if he’s got wind of it and gets away—well, you’ll be for it, Rudge.”
“I didn’t think there was enough evidence for an arrest,” pleaded Rudge. “Not
then.”
“But you do now?”
“Well, that’s for you and the Major to say,” replied Rudge smugly. “But I
haven’t wasted the extra time, sir, I can assure you.” This was no less than the
truth. Rudge had not got to bed at all the previous night.
“Tell us what you’ve done, then, man,” said the Superintendent impatiently.
Rudge cleared his throat. “Perhaps I’d better run through the case as I saw it
before last night, more or less. I don’t mean the facts. We know those. I mean,
the ideas that the facts gave me.”
The silence of the other two encouraged him to do so.

“Well, first of all, of course, there was the question, why was the Admiral’s
body in a boat at all? So much easier, if you’ve got a boat handy, to have taken it
out to sea and sunk it with a few weights. The only reason I could see was to
create a misleading impression; and the only misleading impression I could see
was that the body had floated down-stream instead of up—in other words, that
the murder had been committed some way above Lingham. That gave me a
pointer towards a theory that it had actually been committed in Whynmouth, or
at any rate between Whynmouth and Lingham. Anyhow, I concentrated on that
area.”
“Even then,” observed Major Twyfitt, “it seems a pretty poor reason for not
sinking the body and hiding the fact of murder altogether.”
“That also occurred to me, sir,” Rudge replied, a trifle complacently. “I was
sure there was another reason, and I believe I know now what it is. Old Ware put
me on to it. I’m as certain as I am of anything that he knows more than he’s let
on; and I’m pretty certain he knows who killed the Admiral. Anyhow, he
dropped me a hint. He said, how did I know it was murder?”
“What’s that?” demanded the Superintendent.
“Not murder!” exclaimed the Major.
“I didn’t say that, sir,” Rudge replied quickly. “What I do say is that old Ware
doesn’t think it was murder. Whether it was or not, of course we can’t know yet,
but I’ll take my oath that’s what Ware thinks.”
“What’s your evidence?” snapped the Superintendent.
“None, sir. An impression only. But I know Neddy Ware pretty well; and
though he may not be above a bit of trout-poaching and so on, I’d bet all I’ve got
that he wouldn’t stand for murder. And my inference is that whatever the others
wanted to do, he wouldn’t stand for the body being sunk or any hanky-panky. I
believe the boat was his idea altogether.”
“You believe this and believe that,” growled the Superintendent. “Let’s have a
bit of proof.”
“There isn’t any,” Rudge returned, unabashed. “And in any case I only put it
forward as my own idea. But I do suggest, sir, that there may be something in it;
and if there is—why, it alters the case considerably.”
“It is a possibility,” Major Twyfitt agreed.
The Superintendent, seeing his murder slipping away from him, only looked
sulky.
“Still, we must proceed as if there was no question of it being anything but
murder,” pointed out the Chief Constable.
“Of course, sir. So I’ll get on with my reconstruction. Well, we had the
Admiral being rowed down to Whynmouth by Neddy Ware, and this reporter

fellow, the nephew, rowing the Vicarage boat after him about an hour later, with
Mrs. Mount as his passenger.”
“Eh?” said the startled Chief Constable, who did not remember having heard
anything of the sort. “What’s this?”
“I think it’s obvious, sir. I mean,” said Rudge, with a naughty glance at his
Superintendent, “there’s evidence to that effect. We know Mrs. Mount got to the
Vicarage about eleven; we know the Vicar didn’t see her till well past twelve;
we know the Vicarage boat was taken out that night; we’re pretty sure Fitzgerald
had a hand in the business; we know Fitzgerald was Mrs. Mount’s lover. What’s
the result? Why, that Fitzgerald, knowing she’s coming down that night to see
the Vicar about the divorce, intercepts her in the garden, takes her to the
summer-house for a talk, decides they’d better go down to Whynmouth after the
Admiral (it’s more than possible there was some sort of appointment between
the two men), takes the Vicar’s hat to put on in case anyone sees them going off
in the boat (nothing like a hat to establish identity), takes the Norwegian knife
the boys left there, to cut the painter with—no!” said Rudge thoughtfully. “She
ran back for the knife when they found they couldn’t untie the knot.”
“How the devil do you know that?”
“I don’t know it, sir. But if she did it would explain a lot. It’s always puzzled
me that the Vicar was watering his garden so hard the next day in the blazing
sun. Mr. Mount can’t be such a bad gardener as all that. But suppose she’d left
footprints on the beds when she ran back for the knife. A nice strong jet of water
would destroy them, and so much less obvious than a fork or a trowel, the
garden being under observation all the time by our men in the Admiral’s boathouse. And he even gave the inside of the summer-house a bit of a splashing.
Suppose she left powder scattered about there, like they do?”
“It’s a possibility,” the Chief Constable agreed with interest. “More than a
possibility.”
The Superintendent said nothing.
“Well, anyhow, as I said, we have Fitzgerald chasing after the Admiral. It
would take him half an hour to forty minutes, I suppose, to get down to
Whynmouth. Then there’s a gap of, say, fifteen or twenty minutes, during which
the Admiral is killed and arrangements made about the two boats. The body is
dumped in the Vicarage one, the two painters tied together, and someone rows
them up-stream. Who? Not Fitzgerald. He wouldn’t have time; we’ve got him at
Rundel Croft soon after twelve. Not Mrs. Mount; she’s at the Vicarage at about
the same time.”
“Ware,” nodded the Chief Constable. “Yes, that seems clear.”
The Superintendent said nothing.

“Neddy Ware, sir, yes,” said Rudge, who was now very much enjoying
himself. “And cuts the two painters again when he arrives at Rundel Croft a
couple of hours later, with his own knife which isn’t so sharp as the Norwegian
one.”
“That doesn’t sound like a naval man,” demurred the Major, “to cut a painter
instead of untying it.”
“But supposing it wasn’t a naval man who tied it, sir? Suppose it was a
landsman, with a ridiculous knot, which the dragging in the water had made
tighter still. Besides, it’s my opinion that old Ware was in the sort of mood then
when one does cut instead of untying, even a naval man.”
“All right,” assented the Chief Constable. “Go on.”
The Superintendent said nothing.
“Fitzgerald must have come back by car, on the Whynmouth side of the river
to drop Mrs. Mount at the Vicarage for her interview. And he parked the car
while he was over at Rundel Croft. I made a bit of a bloomer over that, sir. I’d
suspected he must have a car, but seeing he himself was at Rundel Croft I’d only
had enquiries made that side of the river. As soon as Sergeant Appleton got back
last night I sent him off to work the other side. He’s found two witnesses who
saw a car, with the lights out, standing just inside the Vicarage gate, behind the
laurels, out of sight of the road, one at twelve-fifteen and one at twelve-forty.”
“How could they have seen it if it was out of sight of the road?”
“How do people in the country see so much, sir? They’ll have some plausible
explanation you can be sure. But you know as well as I do that if it had been
parked in the Vicar’s cellar with a tarpaulin over it, someone would have seen it
there. And very handy for us too.”
Major Twyfitt laughed. “All right. How did Fitzgerald get across the river,
then?”
“He must have swum it. No other way. I suggest he stripped quickly, rolled
his clothes up in his coat, tossed the bundle across the stream (it’s not more than
forty feet wide there), and swum after it. And there he was, looking for File X as
comfortable as you like, and his sister helping him, when along comes Holland
and taps at the french windows. That must have given both of them a nasty
shock. But he rose to it. Muttered to her to get rid of him at once, kept himself in
the shadow and handed over the typed consent to their marriage. That was quite
enough to send Holland half off his head with pleasure—far too much to have
any room in his mind for noticing how young the Admiral was looking
nowadays. Then Fitzgerald gets the papers, destroys them, goes upstairs and
shaves off his beard, crosses the river again, picks up Mrs. Mount, and goes off
with her in the car. I haven’t been able to trace where they went, but I expect

they made for London—as far away as they could.”
“Then you think Holland was genuine in his identification of the Admiral that
night?”
“I do, sir. Mind you, I think he knows the truth now all right; but he didn’t
then.”
“That makes him an accessory after, too.”
“Yes, sir. Though it seems likely that he’s been told the same tale as Neddy
Ware was—that it wasn’t murder. And Mrs. Holland, too. That would explain
why she didn’t seem surprised, the first time I saw her, to hear that her uncle was
dead, but she did jump when I said he’d been murdered.”
“That fits very well, Rudge,” commended Major Twyfitt.
The Superintendent said at last: “Have you found the weapon?”
“No, sir,” said Rudge.
“Ah,” said the Superintendent.
“But I found this.” Rudge produced from his breast-pocket a strip of brown
paper. Unwrapping it, he brought to light a long slender Norwegian knife, rather
rusty.
The Superintendent took it eagerly.
“Then you have found the weapon.”
“No, sir.”
“Where did you find it, Rudge?” interposed Major Twyfitt.
“In a clump of antirrhinums in the Vicar’s garden, sir.”
“Were you looking for it there?”
“Yes, sir. There was a nice bright moon last night.”
“Why, Rudge,” asked the Chief Constable patiently, “were you looking for
this knife in a clump of antirrhinums last night in the Vicar’s garden?”
“Well, sir, you see, I’d worked it out this way. Was the crime premeditated or
was it not? Somehow, what with Ware’s remarks and the rest, I didn’t think it
was. Anyhow, I could soon test it. If Fitzgerald had intended to murder the
Admiral that night, he would have taken this knife along with him, because he’d
have known as soon as he saw it that nothing would serve him better. If he
hadn’t the intention, I thought he might most probably have thrown it back into
the garden as soon as he’d used it on the painter. So I had a look round Mr.
Mount’s ground last night within an easy throw of his mooring-post.” Rudge by
this time was so pleased with himself that he could not resist sending a highly
unofficial beam at his superior officer.
Major Twyfitt smiled back. “Smart bit of work, Rudge.”
“What I want,” observed the Superintendent, unappeased, “is the weapon.”
“I found this too, sir.”

Rudge produced another piece of brown paper from his pocket, and from it
another knife, an ordinary jack-knife such as sailors and navvies use. “There are
no prints on it,” he said, as he laid it on the table.
“And where did you find that?”
“In a clump of valerian, sir, at the bottom of Sir Wilfrid Denny’s garden,
overhanging the river.”
“Sir Wilfrid Denny’s garden!”
“Yes, sir. It’s like this.” Rudge gave an account of his finding of the sprig of
valerian stuck into the Admiral’s boat, which had not been there when Sergeant
Appleton overhauled it. “It’s like those treasure-hunts,” he added, “where you go
from one clue to another. That valerian was a clue, so I followed it up, and that’s
what I found. It’s a plant. There’s not even any blood on the knife, only rust. Of
course, the real weapon’s at the bottom of the sea.”
“You think so?”
“Rivers,” said Rudge, “can be dragged.”
“And you think that Fitzgerald planted these two clues?”
“I’m certain of it, sir.”
“It’s about time,” remarked the Superintendent, “that we got our hooks on
Master Fitzgerald.”
Rudge glanced at the clock. “I’m expecting him at eleven-thirty. Another
fifteen minutes to go. I told him I’d have an exclusive piece of information for
him if he came along then.”
“He’ll come?” said the Chief Constable doubtfully. “You don’t think you’re
taking a risk?”
“Sergeant Appleton’s tailing him in any case, sir.”
“If Fitzgerald gets away, Rudge,” growled Superintendent Hawkesworth.
“He won’t, sir. Is there anything else you want me to report on before he
comes?”
“Have you traced that copy of the evening paper in his pocket?”
“No, sir. He must have picked it up in Whynmouth, perhaps at the Lord
Marshall. I don’t think there’s much importance to be attached to it.”
“You think now, then, that it was the Admiral who went to the Lord
Marshall?” asked Major Twyfitt.
“I do, sir. I know the Superintendent thought differently, but we’ve proved he
was in Whynmouth, so why shouldn’t it have been him? It’s my notion that he
anticipated danger at the interview ahead of him, and wanted to take Holland
along to stand by; but when the porter told him Holland was in bed he didn’t
bother to have him roused and just gave the first excuse that came into his head.
Of course, he never intended to catch a train at all, but he had to say something.”

“Humph!” said the Superintendent, not too pleased at having his bright idea
snatched from him by a mere inspector.
“And the door-key in the Admiral’s boat?” asked the Major.
“Why shouldn’t the Admiral have dropped it there himself, sir? It seems a
pity,” said Rudge, “to bother to find complicated explanations when there’s a
simple one handy. I felt that,” he added with a look of great innocence, “about
the Admiral’s visit to the Lord Marshall; though I know Mr. Hawkesworth
didn’t agree with me.”
Mr. Hawkesworth’s large face looked for a moment so suffused with honest
emotion that the Chief Constable hurriedly led the conversation into quite a
different track.
“And Mrs. Mount’s death, Rudge? Have you got any further with your theory
of murder there?”
“Not so far as evidence goes, sir,” Rudge said slowly, “but I could put a case
of murder for you, if you’d care to hear it; though I know well enough we could
never put it before a jury as it stands.”
“Let’s hear it.”
“If it was murder, sir, it was done this way. Mrs. Mount makes this
appointment. She’s lost her nerve, and she’s going to give things away. The
Hollands know a good deal already; she’s going to tell them more. I don’t know
how much the Reverend knows, but he’s going to know a good deal more by the
time she’s finished. Naturally, this doesn’t suit a certain person’s book. He gets
wind of it, and goes there to stop her. He must have reached the house just
before I got there myself. She lets him in, and they start arguing. Suddenly they
see me coming up the drive. He snatches up the steel paper-knife from the desk,
and threatens her with it if she utters a sound. She keeps quiet. They watch me
hide in the laurels. Then an hour or so later along come the Hollands, and he
does the same thing. They sit on the lawn, and the situation’s saved for another
few minutes. But he’s getting badly rattled, and she’s probably nearing hysteria.
He doesn’t trust her one inch. All the time, while the three of us are out there,
he’s got to keep the knife at her breast to make sure of her silence. And what
does he do? He makes her hold it there herself, both hands on the hilt, and the
point right on her heart; with one hand over hers he can control her more easily
like that, and use his eyes elsewhere. She’s half-dead with fright of him—sees he
means murder—does whatever he tells her. Then the Hollands come up to the
house again. From their conversation he learns that the front door, which he
can’t have shut properly, has blown ajar. They’re coming in. He hears them go
into the drawing-room, and then into the dining-room; he knows they’re bound
to come into the study. It’s his life or hers now. What does he do? He’s behind

Mrs. Mount now, both his hands over hers on the hilt of the dagger. With a
convulsive pull he forces the thing into her heart. She screams once. He drops
her and darts behind the door, wiping his hands on his handkerchief. In come the
Hollands; Mrs. runs out, Holland stays a moment, then follows her out of the
house. I’m on my way across the lawn. The murderer’s got a couple of seconds
to get inside the lavatory just by the front door. He does it. But he can’t leave the
grounds in case he’s seen. So then,” concluded Rudge, somewhat breathlessly,
“all he’s got to do is to wait till the coast’s clear, creep out of the house, hide
round the angle of it, scuffle on the gravel, and walk in again. And that, sir, is
just what I suggest he did do.”
There was a silence after Rudge had finished.
Superintendent Hawkesworth broke it, by remarking quite mildly: “Can you
prove he didn’t come up the drive? What about those two on the lawn?”
“They couldn’t see from where they were. The angle of the house is in the
way.”
“Besides, they wouldn’t say.”
There was another silence.
“Mr. Hawkesworth,” said Rudge, a little diffidently, “who is to make the
arrest, you or I?”
“You’d better. You’ve put in some very good work on this case,” said the
Superintendent, who after all was a fair man, “and I think you ought to have the
credit of it. The one who makes the arrest always gets the credit. That is,” he
added rather perfunctorily, “if Major Twyfitt agrees.”
“Certainly, certainly,” said that gentleman. “I quite agree. Rudge has done
very well. Saved us a lot of trouble, to say nothing of Scotland Yard.”
“Thank you, sir,” said Rudge modestly, and looked at the clock. The time was
close on half-past eleven.
“Well, I suppose we can only wait,” said the Chief Constable. All three were
beginning to feel uneasy.
They did not have to wait long. Before the hands of the clock had reached the
appointed time a constable put his head round the door to announce, in a
stentorian whisper, that Mr. Graham was there, to see Mr. Rudge by
appointment.
“Show him in,” nodded the Major.
The cropped-headed reporter entered with no less than his usual assurance,
greeting the three heartily and receiving three very curt nods in exchange.
“What’s this, Inspector?” he said. “Something rather special for me? That’s very
decent of you.”
“Something very special,” replied Rudge dryly. “I’m going to make an arrest.”

“An arrest!” Fitzgerald stared at him. “Oh! For Admiral Penistone’s death?”
“For Admiral Penistone’s murder,” returned Rudge grimly. “And something
else.”
“I see. Er—very good of you to let me in on it.” The reporter’s assurance was
not so pronounced now. Without being asked he sat down in a chair as if his legs
had suddenly gone weak. The three others eyed him in silence.
Again the constable put his head round the door. “Sir Wilfrid Denny, to see
Mr. Rudge by appointment.”
“Show him in, Gravestock,” said Rudge. To his superiors he said briefly, as he
rose from his chair: “I asked Sir Wilfrid to be good enough to come down here
himself, so that we could ask him about—certain things.”
The others nodded.
Rudge went to the door to meet Sir Wilfrid. Sir Wilfrid, however, was already
in the doorway as Rudge reached it. Rudge was a large man, Sir Wilfrid a small
one. It was Sir Wilfrid who sprawled on the floor. With every sign of
embarrassment, and apologising heartily, Rudge helped him up and brushed him
down.
“I’m sorry, sir. Most sorry. Very careless of me. Do you know Major Twyfitt?
And Superintendent Hawkesworth? I’m so sorry to have brought you down here,
sir, but there were just one or two questions we wanted to ask you, to clear up a
doubtful point. It’s about a sprig of valerian that was found wedged between two
of the boards of Admiral Penistone’s boat. Now, I’ve searched up and down the
river, and the only clump of valerian growing close to the water is in your
garden. We were wondering if you could account for the sprig in any way?”
Sir Wilfrid thrust his hands into his jacket pockets and stared at Rudge with
perplexity. “No, I can’t.”
“Nor for this knife, found in the same clump of valerian, with traces of blood
on it?”
Sir Wilfrid looked at Major Twyfitt, he looked at Superintendent
Hawkesworth, he looked at Walter Fitzgerald. Then he coughed. “I never saw it
before,” he said.
“Thank you, sir. That’s all I had to ask you. And now I have a very painful
duty to perform.”
Rudge paused, and looked hard at Sir Wilfrid. Sir Wilfrid coughed again,
more rackingly.
“Sir Wilfrid Denny,” said Rudge, “I arrest you for the murders of Hugh
Lawrence Penistone and Celia Mount, and I warn you that anything you say may
be used in evidence against you.”

10
“Hardly, I think,” replied Sir Wilfrid, dryly. “Well, I congratulate you,
Inspector. How did you find out?” He sat, with an air of jauntiness, on the edge
of the table.
“Look here, Denny,” interposed Major Twyfitt awkwardly, as he and
Superintendent Hawkesworth emerged slowly from the stupor into which they
seemed to have fallen. “Look here, I don’t know whether … I mean, better not
say anything. Your solicitor …”
“I know perfectly well what I’m doing,” returned Sir Wilfrid. “He gave me
away, I suppose?” He nodded towards Fitzgerald, who had not moved from his
chair.
“Am I to understand that you wish to make a statement, Sir Wilfrid?” put in
Rudge suavely, though there seemed little ground for such an understanding.
“Yes, I’ll make a statement, certainly. I killed both of them, I’ll tell you that at
once. I don’t know whether it’s any good adding it, but I didn’t mean to kill the
Admiral; at least, I suppose I did, but it was in self-defence. He went for me with
a poker.”
At the table the Superintendent had grabbed a piece of paper and was writing
furiously.
“Then why did you kill Mrs. Mount, when you thought she was going to give
you away?” asked Rudge.
“Really, Rudge,” said the Chief Constable unhappily. “I don’t think we should
ask … Sir Wilfrid really should see his solicitor.”
“Oh, I’ll answer any questions. Why did I kill her? Because I didn’t want to
be arrested, of course. How could I have proved self-defence? When the
circumstances came out, it would look as if I had every motive for murder.”
“You mean your share in the Hong Kong business?”
“I see you know all about it. Yes. But I’m sorry about Mrs. Mount. I—I
suppose I lost my head. Gave way to panic. Horrible thing to do—I suppose,” he
added in a low voice to Walter Fitzgerald, “it’s no good telling you that I’m
ready to make amends with my own life?”
Fitzgerald got up without answering and, crossing to the mantelpiece, leaned
his head on his hands.
“Better get this down quickly,” said Sir Wilfrid to the Superintendent. “We
haven’t much time. The Admiral had suspected for some time my share in the
Hong Kong business. Somehow or other I managed to stave him off. Then Ware
ratted on me.”

“Ware?”
“Yes. He’d known all along—though how the devil he found out I never
discovered. That’s why he settled here when he retired.”
“He’d been blackmailing you?”
“Well, I suppose you’d call it that; but only a matter of a present of a pound or
two now and then, and he never used any threats. He just knew, and I gave him a
few pounds occasionally to keep his knowledge to himself. That’s all. But the
Admiral got hold of him; and whether he paid more, or appealed to ‘duty’ and
‘honour’ and the rest, I can’t say, but Ware must have ratted. Then the Admiral
came down to see me, breathing, as you may imagine, flames and death. He got
me in a corner, till I couldn’t persist in my denials any longer. Then he must
have seen red, because he simply went for me, cold blind, with the poker. I
snatched up the first thing I could (as a matter of fact it was a trench dagger one
of my nephews once gave me as a War souvenir), dodged under the poker, and
got in first. Then I went down to where Ware was waiting, with the Admiral’s
boat, and found that Fitzgerald and Mrs. Mount had just arrived in another boat.”
“One minute, Sir Wilfrid,” interrupted the Superintendent. “What time was
that?”
“Oh, I suppose about twenty minutes to twelve. I told them what I’d done and
that we must get rid of the body. I’m afraid I’d lost my head a bit, because I
wouldn’t listen to them when Ware and Fitzgerald both urged me to come out in
the open and ring up the police. It was justifiable homicide, they said, and
nothing could happen to me. But I knew that if I did, all that Hong Kong
business would come out, and I should lose my pension in any case; and I
thought it almost inevitable that I should have to face a charge of murder. In the
end Fitzgerald agreed to stand by me, but we had a lot more trouble before we
could persuade Ware. Finally he agreed that if he wasn’t to be expected to tell
any direct lies except to conceal the fact of his having been out with the Admiral
that night at all, he wouldn’t give me away; he would just know nothing. I was
too upset to make any arrangements at all; as no doubt he’s told you, Fitzgerald
saw to our plans. Ware insisted that the body should not be concealed,
everything was to be as plain and above board as it could be; so we went up to
the house, had a stiff drink apiece, and put the body in the Vicar’s boat, covered
with a bit of tarpaulin. Ware undertook to tow it up-stream and set it adrift
before returning the Admiral’s boat to its boat-house. In the meantime Fitzgerald
promised to go at once to Rundel Croft and look through the Admiral’s papers,
to destroy anything he might have in writing against me, which I understand he
did. The next day, feeling unable to stay and face it, I frankly took to my heels
and escaped to Paris. Fitzgerald sent me word there that no suspicion seemed to

be directed against me, so I came back.”
“And Mrs. Mount?”
In a low voice Sir Wilfrid gave the details. They turned out to be almost
exactly as Rudge had surmised, except that he maintained that there again he had
never really intended murder. Mrs. Mount, hearing the Hollands actually in the
next room, had made a desperate attempt to escape, and in the struggle Sir
Wilfrid had mechanically tightened his grasp on her and so driven the knife in.
There had been no set plan in his subsequent movements. He had just run in
sheer panic from one hiding place to another as opportunity offered.
He had nothing else to say.
Major Twyfitt shook his head. “I shouldn’t have let you say anything, until
you’d seen your solicitor.”
“My dear fellow,” returned Sir Wilfrid, almost happily, “don’t bother. I shall
never face a judge. You heard me cough just before your man arrested me?
Under cover of the second one I slipped something into my mouth which I
bought for just such an emergency in Paris. I’ve got about ten minutes more to
live, I reckon.”
Major Twyfitt sprang forward in consternation, as did the Superintendent. It is
a bad thing for the police when a prisoner succeeds in committing suicide under
their noses.
Rudge, however, got there first. “Well,” he said, “we’ll put you in safety for
that ten minutes anyhow. Will you come with me, please?” Taking the other by
the arm he led him from the room.
When he returned the Superintendent was telephoning frantically for a doctor,
who was out. “Put him in a cell,” he said briefly. “Don’t worry, sir. We don’t
need a doctor. I knew what he’d got in his left-hand coat pocket. I expected it.
So I made up another similar packet, and changed them during that collision.
Here’s his.” Rudge produced a small twist of white paper.
“But how did you know what his packet looked like?” asked the Chief
Constable.
“I did a bit of spying on Sir Wilfrid last night, sir, through the blinds of his
sitting-room. I saw him making it up, and I guessed what it was, and I knew it
was his left-hand pocket because he had his hand in it when he came in. Sir
Wilfrid’s just swallowed three tablets of bicarbonate of soda; that’s all.”

11
Major Twyfitt dropped back into his chair. Everyone seemed to have forgotten
Walter Fitzgerald, who still stood by the mantelpiece in a dejected attitude.

“You knew last night it was Denny?”
“Not to say knew, sir. I’d suspected it for some time, ever since I interviewed
him in his rose-garden. He seemed very eager to volunteer that he hardly knew
the Admiral at all, and then, for a gentleman who lived right on the river, he
seemed to know very little about the tides; I couldn’t quite swallow that. Then
there were those rumours about bad blood between him and the Admiral, and
what with him having been in Hong Kong at the time I thought he might
possibly be mixed up in that business on the wrong side; besides, he was a bit
too strong against the Admiral having been an innocent party. And though he
remembered that Mr. Fitzgerald was handsome, he couldn’t remember whether
he had a beard or not.”
“Then you were pulling our legs this morning, when you told us all your
suspicions were directed against—someone else?”
“Sir, I never told you. I didn’t mention any name. I was quite sure in my own
mind that it was Denny, but what was the good of saying so? I hadn’t any real
evidence. At first I thought of arresting—someone else in Sir Wilfrid’s presence,
with the idea that if he had done it he’d say so there and then. But that mightn’t
have come off. Then last night, when I saw him making up that packet, I knew
for certain it was him; so I thought I’d take a chance and arrest him. If it came
off, well and good. If it didn’t …”
“You’d have been broken,” said the Superintendent with severity.
“But it did, sir. I thought somehow it would,” admitted Rudge, “if Sir Wilfrid
thought he’d got the contents of that packet safe inside him.”
“Very unofficial, Rudge,” pronounced the Chief Constable. “Most
unprofessional. But dam’ smart.”
“Thank you, sir.”
“So now what about Mr. Fitzgerald here? I think we’d like to ask him a few
questions.”
“Fire away,” said Walter, turning round. “I’ll tell you anything you want to
know. Thank God it’s all over. It’s been a nightmare, I can tell you. I knew you
were after me.”
“Now …” said Superintendent Hawkesworth, and began to put his questions.
Fitzgerald’s tale of the night’s happenings exactly bore out Rudge’s
reconstruction, except that he and Mrs. Mount had not returned to London that
night. They had driven about forty miles and then turned the car into a wood and
slept in it—so far as either of them could sleep. Mrs. Mount, as the days went
by, had been more and more vehement that Denny should give himself up, and
had even divulged some of the facts to her husband under the seal of confession;
he had promised to join her in urging both Sir Wilfrid and Ware to go frankly to

the police and tell them the truth.
Holland had been an innocent party all the time. Elma had known the truth,
but Holland did not yet know who had killed the Admiral; he had, quite simply,
taken Fitzgerald’s word that he had not done so. The matter of the typewritten
consent to the marriage had arisen in this way. Holland had met Fitzgerald in the
East, seen that he was drifting, and liked him enough to try to pull him together.
Walter, without telling him about the Hong Kong affair, had divulged that there
was a charge hanging over him—
“The warrant out against you for forgery?” interposed the Superintendent.
“You know about that? Well, then, yes.”
This charge prevented him from making himself known in England, and
consequently from obtaining his inheritance. Holland promised to see what he
could do. He interviewed the firm in Hong Kong, who undertook, in view of the
time that had elapsed, to withdraw the charge if Walter repaid the money. This
he could not do until he had received his inheritance, and he refused to allow
Holland to lend him the money, a considerable sum. Holland had therefore
undertaken to get in touch with the Admiral in England and try and bring about a
reconciliation, so that the money could be advanced by the family; at the same
time he promised to see Elma and assure her that everything was coming right at
last.
While abroad Walter had always kept in touch with Elma, and when the
Admiral tried to stop her communicating with him, Mrs. Mount had gone to the
house as Elma’s maid, both to keep a roof over her head and to act as a liaison.
The Admiral received Holland with suspicion, as a friend of Walter’s, and at
first would have nothing to do with him. Holland saw that it would take time to
make him change his attitude, and settled down to play him as patiently as he
could. In the meantime, having seen Elma, he promptly fell in love with her.
It was now Walter’s turn to do Holland a favour. He had arrived in England,
and taken lodgings in London. Mrs. Mount hurried up too, and he installed her
near him, under the name of Arkwright. Walter was delighted to hear of
Holland’s feeling for Elma, for knowing himself, he had always feared that
Elma, unless she became attached to somebody of strong character, might
become a drifter too. He had strongly urged Elma, who was by no means in love
herself, to accept Holland. Finally, seeing how much her brother wished it, Elma
consented to do so. The Admiral, however, still proved an obstacle. He would
not give his consent to Elma’s marriage with any friend of Walter’s. Holland had
already improved his standing, but the Admiral was by no means won over.
In the meantime Elma too was trying to do something for Walter. He and Mrs.
Mount had always wanted to get married, but the Vicar would not divorce her.

Elma had fancied that Mr. Mount had shown signs of being interested in herself.
She deliberately set about strengthening this interest in order to be able to use
her influence with him to persuade him to agree to the divorce. It was for this
reason that she always took particular trouble with her appearance whenever she
was to meet him. Walter did not know of this at the time, but Holland observed
with pain his fiancée’s decided set at the Vicar, the reason for which she did not
give him. He therefore told Walter that he had come to the end of his patience;
he was going up to London to get a special licence, and he was going to use it,
consent from the Admiral or no consent. He went.
Walter knew that this would put the Admiral’s back up more than ever, and
Elma would certainly lose the control of her money. He was aware, from his
sister, of his uncle’s obsession with regard to the Hong Kong incident, and
resolved to use this in order to obtain consent to the marriage. He therefore typed
out the form of consent and, taking his courage in his hands, went to see his
uncle shortly after tea on the day of his death, lying in wait for him in the
garden, so as to keep their meeting secret.
It was the first time he had seen the Admiral for many years, and at first the
latter refused to have anything to do with him. When Walter said, however, that
he could tell him the exact truth about the Hong Kong episode, the Admiral
changed his tune. Walter then put his proposition: the truth in exchange for the
consent. The Admiral did not hesitate; he signed on the spot. Thereupon Walter
told him everything. He had to sacrifice Denny to do so, but after all Denny was
a criminal; he had grossly tricked Walter; and Elma’s marriage, to say nothing of
Holland’s happiness, could no longer be jeopardised to save Denny’s face.
The Admiral was beside himself with rage. He raved, he swore, he thundered,
he stamped. With the very greatest difficulty Walter calmed him down and made
him promise to behave at the Vicar’s as if nothing had happened at all. In the
end, however, the Admiral had given this promise and had departed to dress,
breathing fiery vengeance for the morrow.
Walter had intended to go across first thing the next morning to West End to
warn Denny; it never occurred to him that the Admiral would do anything that
night. Concealed, however, in the Vicar’s garden, where he had an appointment
with Mrs. Mount, he had seen the Admiral set out with Ware, whom doubtless
he had intended to pump on the way, and was perturbed. He felt he must wait till
Mrs. Mount came and then, talking it over, decided that they should both go
down the river and put off the interview with the Vicar till they got back; this did
not matter as there was no appointment, a surprise assault having been intended
on the Vicar’s conscience. The details of their departure had been exactly as
Rudge had said.

The rest they had heard from Denny himself. When Walter got back to Rundel
Croft he had broken the news to his sister that their uncle had been accidentally
killed. She was shocked, but pulled herself together and helped him look for the
papers.
“There was blood on her dress,” said the Superintendent.
“So she told me afterwards. It must have come from my hand. Anything
else?”
“The valerian?” asked Rudge.
Walter nodded. “I put it there. Whether my uncle’s death was justifiable
homicide or not (I believe it was) when it came to Celia … I wanted,” said
Walter simply, “to put you on the right track. I wanted Denny to hang.”
“Then why didn’t you come and tell us all you knew?” asked Rudge,
reasonably enough.
“I could hardly give the fellow away,” retorted Walter.
“Oh!” said Rudge. It was a distinction he could not appreciate.
“Look here,” said the Superintendent suddenly. “What was behind that Hong
Kong incident? It was you impersonating your uncle, I suppose?”
Walter flushed. “Yes. This is what happened. Denny had me to dinner one
night and made me rather drunk. He suggested it would be a rag if I put on a
naval uniform, which he happened to have handy, and went down to some dive
and did a song-and-dance; somebody might mistake me for my uncle, and it
would be a glorious joke. He knew my uncle hated me, and I hated him—at
least, we didn’t love each other. I was tickled to death, being a silly young ass,
and agreed like a shot. Denny lent me the uniform and took me down there
himself. I didn’t have to act much; I was as drunk as a lord.
“The next day I was to go on a trek into the interior for my firm, miles away
from newspapers or anything like that. Denny knew, and that’s why that
particular night was chosen. I didn’t get back for some months, and by that time
the whole thing was over. Denny put the wind up me. He said it was a fool thing
to have done, that I had laid myself open to a criminal prosecution, and that he
wouldn’t back me up; the damage was done; I had better lie low and say nothing
about it. I thought it was fishy, but I was frightened and agreed to keep quiet.
“I didn’t come on the truth for years afterwards, and then only by chance. This
was what lay behind it. There was a big ring of opium-smugglers operating in
Hong Kong at that time. Denny was in charge of the customs, and he was in with
the ring; they’d either blackmailed or bought him. My uncle had got wind of the
ring and was getting close on their track. They had to get rid of him, or beat it;
and they hit on that plan. My uncle was lured somehow into that street; a girl
decoy, whom a Chinaman was pretending to maltreat, got him into the dive, he

was sandbagged and then drugged, and his clothes saturated with whisky and
opium. In the meantime I had fallen into it as well, like a child of two. I had a
beard in those days too, and a little powder on it and a line or two on my face
had made me so much like my uncle that nobody ever suspected that it might not
be him—and even he himself had his doubts! Altogether, it was a very pretty
little plot.
“Anything else?” He sauntered towards the door.
“We can’t let him go,” whispered the Superintendent urgently.
“But what can we hold him on?” Major Twyfitt whispered back.
“He’s an accessory after.”
“Not to a crime,” smiled Walter, whose ears must have been particularly
sharp. “You can’t be an accessory after to justifiable homicide.”
“That hasn’t been proved yet,” said the Superintendent sternly.
“No? Well, you can’t detain me till it has been.” With a quick movement
Walter was through the door.
“We must hold him,” muttered Hawkesworth, jumping up. “I don’t know
what on, but we must. Get him, Rudge, man! There’s that Hong Kong warrant
still out against him anyhow.”
But Walter was already through the charge-room and at the street door. By the
pavement stood a car, its engine ticking over. On seeing Walter, the driver thrust
in the gear. The car jumped forward, and Walter leapt into the back.
“Walter Fitzgerald,” enunciated the Superintendent, charging through the
doorway, “I—”
“Don’t want to lose you, but I think you ought to go,” chanted Walter
mockingly as the car gathered speed. “Good-bye, Superintendent. You can send
any message through my sister.”
Elma, sitting in front beside Holland, turned round and waved enthusiastic
confirmation.
The Superintendent darted for the telephone. “I’ll have that car stopped before
it’s gone three miles,” he said grimly.
Major Twyfitt touched him on the shoulder. “Why bother? We don’t really
want him, you know. We’ve got the right man. We’ll let him go. It’s my belief
that he’s in better hands than ours.”
With an air of disgust the Superintendent relinquished the telephone. “As you
say, sir, of course. But we ought to have held him. Yes, Gravestock?”
The burly constable looked scared. “Could you come to the cells, please, sir? I
think there’s something wrong with the prisoner Denny.”
The three officers tramped there in silence.
“There’s certainly something wrong with him,” said the Superintendent a

minute later. “He’s dead. That’s what’s wrong with him. Rudge!”
In consternation Rudge drew from his pocket the wisp of paper and hurriedly
opened it. “No,” he said with relief, “these are his. He had my soda bics—
nothing else.”
“Then what did he die of?”
“He just died,” said Major Twyfitt, looking down on the still figure. “He’s
old. He knew he was going to die—so he did die.”
There was a moment’s rather awed silence.
“And he never signed his confession,” said the Superintendent disgustedly.

THE END

APPENDIX I
SOLUTIONS
CHAPTER I
By Canon Victor L. Whitechurch
No Solution
CHAPTER II
By G. D. H. and M. Cole
No Solution
CHAPTER III
By Henry Wade
1919, soon after the War, Admiral Penistone (young, rapid promotion for
brilliant active service exploits) becomes involved in a disreputable brawl in a
house of ill-repute in Hong Kong. Owing to his war services the Admiralty allow
him to send in his papers, instead of court-martialling him. There were also
involved in this brawl three other Englishmen: (1) Walter Fitzgerald, young and
weak-charactered, struggling with drink and drugs; (2) his friend, and partner in
a trading concern, Vanyke, an older man; (3) another trader, Holland. During the
course of the brawl Fitzgerald is killed by Chinamen, but this is not known to the
naval authorities when they deal with Penistone.
Holland, learning of old Fitzgerald’s will, blackmails Penistone, his price
being “the hand of your niece, Elma.” Elma, a woman of spasmodically
passionate nature, does for a time fall wildly in love with Holland, but cools off
and (when the story begins) is backing out of the engagement. This is the real
IN

cause of the Admiral’s annoyance with his niece.
Elma is now setting her cap at the Vicar, a handsome and vigorous man,
though fifty. On the night in question she persuades him to a romantic trip up the
river after she is supposed to have returned home. The Vicar’s “shock” at the
news is largely due to his fear that this “adventure” will “come out.”
Penistone, after locking up the boat-house and finishing his cigar out of doors,
returns to his study, where he is murdered by the butler, Emery. Emery is in fact
Vanyke, who believes Penistone to be morally, if not actually, responsible for
the death of his “poor young friend, Walter.” “Emery” puts Penistone’s overcoat
back on to the body, to suggest that he was killed out of doors. The newspaper
(the one delivered at the house at 9 p.m.) was splashed with blood, so he thrust it
in the pocket for the same reason. At 2.30 a.m. he carries the body to the boathouse, unlocks it with the Admiral’s key, rows across to the Vicarage wharf,
dumps the body in the boat (in which the Vicar had left his hat on his romantic
voyage) and cuts it adrift. (This to suggest murder at the Vicarage—or at least to
lay a false trail.) As suggested by P.C. Hempstead, the boat is stranded at slack
tide and comes back on the flow. Emery swabs out the Rundel Croft boat for fear
of blood-stains.
Elma probably went to London to see her solicitors, and her dress and shoes
may have been hidden by Emery, further to confuse the issue.
Probably Neddy Ware knew something about the Hong Kong incident.

CHAPTER IV
By Agatha Christie
real Elma Fitzgerald is dead and her brother Walter is masquerading as her,
being unable to claim his inheritance under his own name as he is wanted by the
police. Holland has been a friend of his in remote parts of the world. Walter
finds it hard to get any definite statement as to money out of the Admiral and, to
force his hand, pretends to be engaged to Holland. The Admiral will then be
forced to hand over the money. Unknown to Walter, however, the Admiral has
speculated with it and lost it.
Walter, who has been an actor at one time, has had no difficulty in deceiving
the Admiral, who has not seen his niece since she was a child. He takes no great
pains with Holland, but reserves his best effects of make-up when asked out in
the neighbourhood, when he takes an artistic pleasure in playing the vamp.
The Admiral, however, has received an anonymous letter from “Célie,”
THE

stating that “Elma” is a man. He slips this into his pocket unopened just before
starting for the Vicarage and opens it when waiting for “Elma” to say good-bye
to the Vicar.
He immediately taxes Walter with the truth as they go over in the boat, and
says he will give him up to the police. Walter, who knows the Admiral’s
uncompromising character, stabs him as the boat glides into the boat-house.
He then goes up to the house and waits till all is quiet. Then he makes up as
the Admiral, dons an overcoat, puts the newspaper in the pocket and shows
himself at the Lord Marshall, which is badly lighted and where the Boots is a
rustic who is nearly half-witted. He asks for Holland, then says he can’t wait.
He returns. Later goes down to the boat-house, takes the boat across the river,
puts the body in the other boat and cuts the painter. He thinks the boat will go
out to sea, and as the Admiral’s boat will be in the boat-house, the Admiral will
be supposed to have left on foot and gone to town by train. The boat, however,
drifts down and drifts into the bank, to be sent up-stream later.
The murder discovered, “Elma” hastens away with the white dress on which
are blood-stains. He intends to return with a good excuse, secure in the alibi he
has created.
The Vicar did take his boat out again. He met his former wife at Fernton
Bridge. He was terribly anxious to have no “talk,” hence his peculiar manner.

CHAPTER V
By John Rhode
so-called Admiral Penistone was an impostor. He was, I think, by profession
a blackmailer (hence the files of newspaper cuttings) who had contrived to get
several people into his power, among them Sir Wilfrid Denny, who had been
impoverished by “Penistone’s” constant demands.
Denny decides to commit the murder. He learns that “Penistone” has arranged
to meet Holland on the night of the ninth, and lies in wait for him at Fernton
Bridge. As he passes, Denny hails him, saying that he has urgent business to
discuss—perhaps that he has money which “Penistone” had demanded. He gets
back into the boat, sitting in the stern with “Penistone” facing him as he rows.
When they reach the railway bridge (see Map) he suddenly rises and plunges the
dagger into “Penistone” as he leans forward to take a stroke.
He leaves the boat under the bridge, among the piles, where it is safe from
observation in the dark. He then calls at an hotel in Whynmouth, in order to
THE

establish his presence there at a particular hour (11 p.m.). He slips out from here,
and goes to the Lord Marshall, where he impersonates “Penistone,” not a very
difficult matter owing to the darkness of the hall, with the object of suggesting
that “Penistone” was then alive. Then he returned to the first hotel, where he
remains till after midnight. He had thus established as good an alibi as he could.
The body, being under cover of the bridge, remains dry. As soon as the tide
slackens, he rows up the river, transfers the body to the Vicar’s boat, swings the
stern in to shore, and lands. Seeing the Vicar’s hat, he puts that in the boat, by
way of confusing the trail. Then he proceeds according to Ware’s speculation.
He replaces the Admiral’s boat in the Rundel Croft boat-house, making the
mistake of doing so bow first. This done, he walks home to West End. His
sudden departure for London is concerned with the will of John Martin
Fitzgerald, a subject at present somewhat obscure.

CHAPTER VI
By Milward Kennedy
1. FOUR men are engaged in the supply of arms to Chinese armies: they are Mr.
X (main financial element), Admiral Penistone (Gunnery Expert: acquainted
with China: retired under a cloud from the Navy: the Admiral has a smaller
financial interest), Sir Wilfrid Denny (formerly of the Chinese Customs Service)
and Holland (who does the “transactions on the spot”). Holland is naturally
unready to discuss his business with the police.
2. The Admiral wants to increase his financial holding—in other words to oust
Mr. X. He is in negotiation with Sir Wilfrid and Holland to that end.
3. Sir Wilfrid is reluctant; he refuses to move openly and warns Mr. X
secretly.
4. Mr. X, already suspicious of the Admiral and wishing to keep an eye on his
doings, has persuaded his mistress to go as French maid to Elma Fitzgerald.
5. When the Admiral moves to Rundel Croft: (a) Sir Wilfrid is afraid Mr. X
will think he too is letting him down; (b) the “French maid” discovers that just
across the river lives the husband whom she deserted ten years ago. She clears
out, and tells Mr. X why.
6. Sir Wilfrid reports to Mr. X that the Admiral is trying to arrange a meeting
of the three partners. Holland apparently has agreed. Sir Wilfrid is told to agree
also and to get the meeting held at some “neutral” place, say near (not on)
Fernton Bridge. He is told, moreover, not to let it be known that he has any

dealings with Holland and the Admiral.
7. The Admiral will not give his assent to Elma marrying Holland unless
Holland falls in with his “commercial” plans, and further agrees to put into the
new concern which he hopes to form some of the capital which Elma will
acquire. Perhaps he also wants to help in “manipulating” her brother’s money.
Her brother, always a rolling stone, has disappeared, but has been heard of too
recently for his death to be “presumed.”
8. Mr. X, informed by Sir Wilfrid of the time and place fixed for the “secret
meeting,” drives down dressed as a chauffeur and wearing gauntlets. He insists
that the “French maid” is to go to the Vicarage and so arrange matters with the
Vicar that she can resume her place at Rundel Croft if necessary. He hopes,
himself, whilst she is with the Vicar, to get into Rundel Croft (with which he is
perfectly familiar, thanks to the “French maid’s” account of it) and to extract
various documents relating to “Chinese Contracts.”
9. While the “French maid” is with the Vicar Mr. X walks down through the
garden, intending to cross the river in the Vicar’s boat. He meets the Admiral,
who has just returned in his boat.
10. The Admiral hustles away after dinner at the Vicarage, because he wants
to get Elma home, and then go to his “secret meeting.” He tidies up his boat as
usual, but finds he has left his pipe at the Vicarage and his cigar-case is empty.
He goes and gets his coat, meaning to walk to the bridge; but it is practically as
quick to cross to the Vicarage, get his pipe and walk on from there. (According
to the Map, the distances are practically identical.)
11. Mr. X and the Admiral talk. Mr. X produces the evening paper with its
Chinese news. The Admiral, conscious of the “secret meeting,” is somewhat
uncomfortable. They retire to the summer-house. There, there is not only the
Vicar’s hat but also the knife. The talk ends in a quarrel and Mr. X stabs the
Admiral. The time is about 11 p.m.
12. Mr. X reflects that his arrangements hold good for a murder as much as
for anything else. He has even told Sir Wilfrid, as it happens, to use the
Admiral’s name when he asks for Holland at his hotel—which may make it
appear that the Admiral was alive and in Whynmouth at 11 p.m.
13. He finds the key of the french window, crosses in the Admiral’s boat
(leaving the body in the summer-house), collects the papers from the study,
locks up again and re-crosses in the Admiral’s boat—by mistake dropping the
key. He assumes that he has dropped it in the river, he dares not strike a light to
make sure.
14. He waits in the car. When the “French maid” reappears (and he is, of
course, quite satisfied that neither she nor the Vicar will talk about the meeting)

he tells her to drive gently on alone to Fernton Bridge and thence towards
Rundel Croft. When he is sure that the Vicarage is asleep, he carries the dead
body down to the Vicar’s boat, leaving the knife with (not in) the body and
adding the Vicar’s hat to the cargo. His original intention is to set the boat adrift,
but then he realises that the river is probably tidal and that the boat might not
drift out to sea. So he decides to leave things as they are. (The body therefore has
been “under cover” until nearly one o’clock; and the blood has ceased to flow
before the body is put in the boat.) Mr. X crosses again in the Admiral’s boat
(which he fastens up wrongly), makes his way through the grounds of Rundel
Croft to the car, and so departs with the “French maid.”
15. The non-appearance of the Admiral perturbs both Holland and Sir Wilfrid.
They wait a considerable time, and then Sir Wilfrid goes home (next morning,
when Mr. X telephones to “enquire” about the meeting, he hurries up to
London). Holland decides to have it out with the Admiral then and there. He
starts to walk to Rundel Croft, sees a car standing near the entrance and decides
to go round via the Vicarage. For the whole business is somewhat fishy and he
has no wish to be seen. His anxiety not to attract notice retards his progress. To
his horror he finds the body in the Vicar’s boat; it is by now about two o’clock.
He realises his danger—he has no alibi; the Admiral may have said he was going
to see him by the bridge; there is the question of the will and the marriage. He
thinks things out deliberately. The tide will turn, he supposes, fairly soon and
start to run up the river—“away from the bridge,” as it were. He must wait for
the turn. The waiting is anxious work; he gets more and more jumpy, and more
and more anxious to clear off. At about three o’clock the tide is slackening. He
cuts the painter—not because he cannot reach to untie the knot, but because to
cut it suits his state of mind—it seems quicker than untying a knot. Then he
thinks of finger-prints and throws the knife into the river.
16. Holland’s plan is now to try and make it appear that he spent the night at
his hotel. He must see Elma as soon as he can reasonably appear at Rundel
Croft. He is there before the Inspector. Emery has to be “drilled” a bit; also
Jennie Merton. The delay when the Inspector calls is thus explained. Elma and
Holland agree that there is no evidence but theirs that the Admiral hesitated to
consent to their marriage; Holland was accepted as her fiancé. So the “will”
motive will not be so serious; anyhow it can be argued that Elma is likely soon
to inherit her brother’s money. If they get married she cannot be made to give
evidence against her husband—and only she can say what the Admiral meant to
do after dinner at the Vicarage. They have already got a licence—for the
circumstances (the gun-running, the Admiral’s “negotiation,” etc.) have
suggested the need to be ready to marry at short notice. They go off to London.

17. The “favourite frock” was never hidden. But it was a favourite, and
therefore suitable for the occasion in London: and for the same reason Elma
hesitated to let her new and untried maid pack it for her in the suit-case. She
folded it herself, put it on a shelf and packed it on top after seeing the Inspector.
As to her regard for her appearance—she (like some others) took more trouble
before strangers than before intimates (she had no time in the Inspector’s case, of
course). Her “acting” during the interview was what one would expect—partly
good and partly bad.
18. As for the Vicar: when first the police come, the thing uppermost in his
mind is that nothing must come out about his wife’s visit. He has his sons to
think of, above all (almost his first thought). His hat can have nothing to do with
it; he will stick to his story; he knows nothing about the murder and cannot be
connected with it—and if the visit of the “French maid” comes out, there might
be an added complication. And then, after he has maintained the “all quiet after
ten-fifteen” story, comes the loss of the knife, and his discovery of ominous
stains in his summer-house. He will water the garden, and if he misdirects the
hose-pipe, it will merely be a sign of his worldly incompetence.

CHAPTER VII
By Dorothy L. Sayers
of Winchester, solicitor, married, in 1888, Mary
Penistone, and had by her two surviving children, Walter, born in 1889 and
Elma, born in 1898.
In 1909, Walter, aged twenty, got into some kind of trouble with his father
and left the country. He went to China and got a job as a clerk with a tobacco
company in Hong Kong, where, being idle and vicious, though handsome and
attractive, he got into the opium-smuggling business.
The assistant-commissioner in the Chinese customs was a man called Wilfrid
Denny, who had got into difficulties through having an extravagant wife, and
was heavily in debt to a big Chinese money-lender. Denny soon found that the
price of this “accommodation” was to be the turning of a blind eye to the
passage of opium through the customs. This brought him into contact with
Walter, who soon saw himself in a position to blackmail the weak and foolish
Denny. Denny was then about forty years of age.
In 1911, the Captain in command of the cruiser Huntingdonshire, stationed at
Hong Kong, was Captain Penistone, young Fitzgerald’s uncle, and to get the
JOHN MARTIN FITZGERALD

opium through meant getting it past Penistone. The previous Captain had been
fairly easy to diddle, but Penistone was alert and incorruptible. He was then
forty-three, a vigorous, jovial man, well liked by his crew, and a smart officer.
As it was impossible to square him, it was necessary to get rid of him. Walter, in
collusion with Denny, used his knowledge of his uncle’s character to involve
him in some discreditable affair (e.g., with a woman, or in connection with the
ill-treatment of natives). Penistone, though really innocent, is made to appear at
the very least extremely indiscreet, and is advised to send in his papers.
Penistone never knew who was at the bottom of his trouble—and did not even
know that Walter was in Hong Kong, but he became a changed and soured man.
During the War he is permitted to rejoin and retires finally with the rank of
Admiral in recognition of his services, but he still broods on what he might have
done but for “the trouble,” and when the War is over he determines to get to the
bottom of the business. He energetically collects information about everything
and everybody who might possibly have been concerned in the plot against him
—a job made more difficult by the post-war confusion in China. The thing has
become almost a monomania.
Meanwhile, Walter continues his illicit activities, and in 1914 commits
himself to a forgery. The War breaks out just in time to rescue him from arrest.
He manages to get away and joins up. But the warrant is still out against him,
and if he survives it seems likely that he will be haled up and sent to a long term
of penal servitude. He therefore makes arrangements to disappear. He sends
home a letter of the “Dear Father-I-have-neglected-you-all-but-hope-I-am-nowforgiven-and-have-turned-over-a-new-leaf-and-am-doing-my-duty”
type,
enclosing, in case of accident, a will drawn in favour of Elma.
After the Loos show in September, 1915, Walter deserts and disappears. He is
“missing, supposed killed.” Old Fitzgerald, who has long repented of his
harshness to “dear Walter, poor boy,” is now getting very doddery and ill.
Having come into money, he redrafts his will, but retains the dispositions made
some years previously in favour of Walter and Elma, for Walter has turned up
once and he may turn up again. (See Chapter VII.)
Meanwhile, Walter has contrived to turn up somewhere else with somebody
else’s papers. He keeps secretly in touch with Elma, to whom he is still the
wonderful and beloved “big brother”—a radiant memory of childhood. If Walter
is in trouble, it must be the fault of some wicked person who got him into it.
Walter takes Elma into his confidence. The idea is to prove his death, when
Elma will come into his share of the money and hand it over to him in his new
name.
Old Fitzgerald dies in 1916. Nothing much can be done till 1918–19, when the

British prisoners of war are released and the “presumption” of the death of
missing combatants is recognised by the courts.
Everything is put in trim for “presuming” the death of Walter, when an
inconvenient person turns up who knew Walter when he first joined the Army
and states positively that he saw him alive in Buda-Pesth in 1918. He does not
know the name under which Walter was then passing, but insists that he cannot
be mistaken in the man. Under the circumstances, the court refuses to presume
death. Note: It is only now that it becomes necessary for Elma to marry in order
to provide Walter with money. See Chapter VII as regards her present
opportunities. This is when the forgery business comes to light (see Chapter
VII).
Time goes on. Walter, now known as Mr. X, is living rapidly and expensively
abroad—chiefly on his wits and by exploiting his charm of manner. In 1920 he
seduces a Mrs. Mount, who is staying at Monte Carlo with some friends, and has
some money of her own. Walter is at a low ebb, or he would not be bothered
with the parson’s wife. Having sucked her dry, he abandons her to get on as best
she can. She takes a post as a maid in Paris.
Life becomes increasingly sordid and difficult for Walter. Then one day he
hears that Denny has retired to England with a knighthood and a pension.
Splendid idea! He will blackmail Denny! He does so—knowing that Denny dare
not expose him for fear that the old Chinese story will come out, when pop goes
Denny’s pension.
Walter’s line is: pay me, and I keep quiet. Stop the payments and I blow the
gaff. I am so damned hard up that I don’t really care a curse whether I go to
prison or not, but you will be for it, my lad! The miserable Denny pays up: all
his savings go—the proceeds of the smuggling business, and he has to go on
paying Walter out of his modest pension.
Meanwhile the Admiral (now living in Cornwall), in the course of his
energetic enquiries, has at last got upon the track of the old Hong Kong business.
A man called Arthur Holland, who, under cover of a vague export business, does
a certain amount of secret enquiry in China (he is probably .mixed up with
Chinese post-war politics), gives him some useful information. The Admiral is
beginning to suspect that (a) Walter is alive, (b) Walter was concerned in his
disgrace, (c) Denny had something to do with it also.
Walter is now becoming bolder. He has grown a beard and changed his
appearance, and one day he turns up on Denny’s doorstep. Denny must now
keep him and establish him firmly in his new personality as Mr. X. If not—up
goes the monkey!
Denny is harried from pillar to post. He knows (from what Walter has told him

in moments of expansiveness), however, that there is one person in England
whom “Mr. X” does not want to meet, and that is Mr. Mount. Mr. Mount knows
enough about “Mr. X” as Mr. X to make any place too hot to hold him. Denny
consults Crockford, discovers that Mount has taken a living at Lingham and
takes a house in the same neighbourhood. Walter, returning from a trip abroad,
finds that Denny has fled to sanctuary. He tries to dislodge Denny, but Denny
sits tight.
But now a new source of trouble begins. Denny writes in agitation to Walter.
He has heard from the Admiral. The Admiral—after all these years!—is most
tiresomely starting to ask questions about that dead-and-buried business in Hong
Kong. He looks as though he really suspected something. Denny is doing his
best to be amiable and noncommittal, but it is all dreadfully difficult.
Walter feels that a little spying ought to be done. He hunts up his former
mistress, Mrs. Mount, over whom he still exerts great influence, and makes her
go as French maid to his sister, under the name of Célie Blanc. She is to find out
what she can about who comes to the house and what the Admiral is doing, and
to act as liaison between Walter and Elma. For the Admiral, suspecting that
Elma knows where Walter is, is beginning to keep her under strict control and
supervise her correspondence.
To Elma, of course, Walter is the poor, wronged boy who never gets a chance.
She is anxious to get him his money, by fair means or foul. As the scheme to
prove the death was a failure, she now wants to make over her own share of the
money to him. Fortunately, Holland has fallen desperately in love with her sulky
beauty. Though temperamentally disinclined to marriage, she is keen to marry
Holland to get the money. The Admiral has a pretty shrewd idea of this, and
therefore tries to oppose the marriage. Elma, of course, does not confide in
Holland—he is a tool of the Admiral’s. Everybody is in a conspiracy to keep
dear Walter out of his own. She therefore breaks off open correspondence with
Walter, and treats the Admiral with the contempt he deserves.
Holland has been told by the Admiral that if he marries Elma, she will
probably send all her money to this scamp of a brother. But Holland, being in
love, says he wants Elma, not her money. The Admiral says: “You won’t get my
consent.” Holland replies: “I don’t care.” But Elma does care. The control of the
money is what she is marrying him for. The situation drags on. Elma alternates
between encouraging Holland and rebuffing him. If she seems too affectionate
he will urge marriage without the Admiral’s consent; if she appears too
mercenary he may get put off altogether. As he is the only man whom she has
much opportunity of meeting nowadays, and no other suitor seems forthcoming,
she must keep him on the lead if possible.

Mrs. Mount is a weak sort of woman, still infatuated by Walter. I think she
knows him to be Fitzgerald all right, but supposes, like Elma, that he has been
deeply wronged. Walter is quite cocksure that she is completely under his
thumb, and, as a bait, has promised to marry her if she succeeds in helping him
to get the money.
Very well, then. The Admiral comes to the conclusion that the one person
who really can help him to find Walter and disentangle the Chinese business is
Denny. Making one of his lightning decisions, he takes Rundel Croft, and carries
the whole family off there, bag and baggage.
This is dreadfully disconcerting to Walter, and Mrs. Mount is appalled when
she finds herself—not only in the same village as, but actually next door to, her
former husband. (I don’t think Walter mentioned to Mrs. Mount where her
husband was living—why should he?—and by the time Mrs. Mount has been
able to tell Walter where they are going, the move has taken place. Or it is just
possible that Mrs. Mount did know, but deliberately didn’t tell Walter at first,
because she was bitten with the idea of getting a sight of her two boys. Perhaps
this latter idea makes the thing more credible and more suitable to Mrs. Mount’s
weakly emotional character.)
The Vicar, of course, sees and recognises his wife, and is greatly shocked. He
has an interview with her in private, in which he regains a good deal of his old
influence over her, as a priest, at least, if not as a man. He asks her kindly about
Walter (whom he, of course, knows only as X)—is she still living with him? She
has never asked for a divorce and he, the Vicar, would never think of divorcing
her on his own account, as it is against his principles. To him, she is always his
wife; if she asks for divorce, he will not let his religious convictions stand in her
way. She is touched by his real consideration for her, and admits that X has
behaved badly to her, but that she now has hopes that he may marry her after all,
if his “affairs” can be put right. Mrs. Mount (always readily accessible to the
latest influence) becomes very much troubled after this interview. Moreover,
from what she hears at the Admiral’s, she begins to fear that she is being mixed
up in something much more wicked and dangerous than the restitution of a
persecuted man to his “rights.” After all, she can by this time have few illusions
as to Walter’s personal character. She works herself up to going to the Vicar
again, and telling him what she knows of the story, under the seal of confession.
The Vicar is stern with her. It is absurd to suppose that he can give her
absolution. She is not repentant—she is merely frightened. She is deceiving her
employer and engaging in a conspiracy to defeat the ends of justice. Her duty is
to break with Walter and make a clean breast of everything to the Admiral.
Mrs. Mount characteristically does neither one thing nor the other. She won’t

go on with it and she daren’t tell the Admiral—she simply leaves Rundel Croft,
merely telling Walter that her husband has recognised her and that the situation
is impossible. Walter is annoyed, but recognises that she is no longer to be
trusted. He tells her not to be a fool. Why shouldn’t Elma marry Holland?
Nothing more is contemplated. He gets out of her an exact description of the
Admiral’s house and the Vicarage, etc.
Two weeks later, Walter hears from Denny. The Admiral is getting
dangerously near to the truth. “Old friends” have been visiting him: something
has been discovered. The Admiral must be silenced.
Walter agrees. His plan is to:
(a) Kill the Admiral.
(b) Manufacture proof of his (Walter’s) death at some period
subsequent to old Fitzgerald’s death.
(c) Let Elma inherit Walter’s share of the money under
Walter’s will of 1915.
He and Denny will then be safe, and all the money will be, to all intents and
purposes, in Walter’s hands. If Denny is good, he shall get a share of it. Walter
then gets Denny to convey a letter to Elma. He says he has found means to
obtain a hold over the Admiral and force him into giving consent to Elma’s
marriage with Holland. She is to say nothing of this to Holland (who might highmindedly object to these methods), but she is to tell Holland that she is ready to
marry him, Admiral or no Admiral. Holland is to get a special licence, and she
will come up to town to marry him on the morning of August 10th.
The plan is then laid to murder the Admiral, steal the compromising papers,
and thus leave everything happy and comfortable all round.

The Murder
1. Holland comes down unexpectedly by the eight-fifty to see the Admiral. He
is worried by the idea that he will injure Elma’s prospects by marrying her, and
wants to give the Admiral a final chance of consenting before it is too late. He
rings up from the Lord Marshall and is answered by Mrs. Emery. He hears that
Elma and the Admiral are out to dinner and will probably not be back till pretty
late. This is tiresome, but he must do what he can. He will stay the night and
make one more effort to see the Admiral but, if not, he will simply go up to town
next morning and carry out his plan. He dines at the Lord Marshall and then goes
out for a walk; while doing so he is seen by Denny.

2. Denny has told the Admiral that he has found out something the Admiral
would like to know about Walter and the Chinese business. He has got hold of a
man who knows something. This man is “in trouble” and cannot appear openly,
but if the Admiral will come down after dinner to an old deserted boat-house
near Fernton Bridge, Denny and “the man” will meet him there. The rendezvous
is fixed for 11.15 sharp. The Admiral swallows the bait eagerly. Walter (through
Denny) has told Elma about all this, though to her, of course, “the man” is the
mysterious person who has got “the hold” over the Admiral and is going to
squeeze the consent to the marriage out of him. The Admiral, equally of course,
thinks Elma is quite in the dark about it all.
3. The plan for the murder is this: Denny is to go on foot to the old boathouse, meet the Admiral at 11.15 and hold him in talk. Meantime, Walter goes to
the Lord Marshall, arriving about 11.15. There, with his beard and family
resemblance to his uncle the Admiral, he will easily be mistaken for him in the
dim light. He is to leave some sort of message. (When Walter hears from Denny
that Holland is in Whynmouth, they seize on this circumstance. Walter is to ask
for him, suggesting that Holland may be involved in the business if anything
goes wrong with their plans.) Thus they will establish the fact that the Admiral
intended to travel by the 11.25 train. Walter will then take Denny’s car to
Fernton Bridge (about three minutes by car) and, while Denny holds up the
Admiral, Walter will bash him savagely about the head with a blunt instrument.
The body is then to be taken to the level crossing, which is the kind worked by a
lever from the signal-box. All this should not take more than about seven
minutes (say, one minute for the bashing, three minutes from boat-house to car,
three minutes to level crossing—this allows him to drive at only thirty-five miles
an hour over one and a quarter of a mile or thereabouts—he could really go
much faster for that brief distance). At about 11.22 they will carry the body on to
the down line, through the side wickets, trusting to the darkness. At 11.24 the
down express is due to pass through, not stopping at Whynmouth. With any luck
it will smash up the Admiral and the conclusion will be drawn that he met his
death by accident, through passing the level crossing through the wickets as a
short cut from the Lord Marshall to the UP platform (see Map).
Walter will then go on to Rundel Croft to see Elma, who is expecting him. He
will explain that the meeting has taken place, and that, in consequence of what
has transpired, the Admiral has gone up to town, but that, before going, he has
given consent to the marriage. Walter will then hand Elma the typewritten
consent, which he has forged for the purpose. Elma is to carry on and marry
Holland at once, since Walter needs money desperately and there is no time to
be lost.

4. This beautiful plan goes wrong. What actually happens is this. Mrs. Mount,
who, what with the Vicar and one thing and another, has begun to suspect Walter
of worse things than she ever thought him capable of, has started to do a little
detecting on her own account. I think she probably intercepts some
communication from Denny referring to the date and time of the meeting of the
Admiral. She is living in London either with Walter or in some place selected by
him. She discovers (a) that Walter has no genuine intention of ever marrying
her, having made other arrangements, and (b) that there is a plan to do away with
the Admiral that same night. She determines to warn the Admiral. There is no
train she can catch (the 8.50 has gone and the express doesn’t stop at
Whynmouth), so she hires a car and starts out for Lingham.
She does not go straight to Rundel Croft, preferring not to face Walter, who
may be there (she does not know details of the plot). She will try to get hold of
the Vicar and warn him. In the village she directs the chauffeur to stop at the
Vicarage gate and wait for her. She will not be many minutes. She reaches the
Vicarage at 10.40. (N.B.—This is earlier than the constable said in Chapter VI,
but he only said about 10.45.) She does not like to ring the bell (the boys! the
servants!)—perhaps the Vicar is down the garden having his bed-time pipe (she
remembers his habits). She creeps down to the summer-house. Nobody there—
only the Vicar’s hat and Peter’s knife on the table. She wonders what to do.
Shall she throw stones at the Vicar’s bedroom window? (But which is it?) Or
shall she take the boat and go boldly across to Rundel Croft? She is playing with
the open knife, and it occurs to her that if she has to face Walter on her own it
may be a useful weapon. Suddenly she hears the unmistakable noise of oars in
the rowlocks. She hurries down to the boat-house and in the summer dusk sees
the Admiral starting off down the river. He must be going to the fatal
rendezvous! In the summer-house she has snatched up what she thinks is her
black calf-skin bag, but is really the Vicar’s hat. She pulls the Vicar’s boat in by
the rope at the stern, but, owing to the strong stream and the stiffness of the new
painter, has some difficulty in unhitching the painter from the mooring-post. She
therefore cuts the painter with Peter’s knife, and I think that at this point she
drops the knife into the river, to be subsequently found. She gets the rowlocks
into place and starts off in pursuit of the Admiral, who by this time is well away
down the river. (She may try to hail him, but the Admiral will probably pay no
attention—or she may be afraid of causing a disturbance. The boys! the
servants!)
5. The Coat. The Admiral has decided to go by river to the meeting. To get the
car out means making a racket, and he does not walk because he has a game leg
as a result of the War. (This will make it O.K. about his not being supposed

capable of walking to Whynmouth in the time, by the way.) He waits in the boathouse till Elma is well out of the way and reflects that he had better take a coat
with him, since he will get hot rowing and the interview in the old boat-house
may be a long one. He goes up to the house and fetches the coat, and returning
re-locks the french window. He then gets the boat out. He reckons that with the
tide setting strongly down the river, he will make Fernton Bridge well within the
half-hour, being a vigorous old boy at the oars.
6. Mrs. Mount is not able to make such good time down the river as he does.
She used to boat in the old days with the Vicar, but she is out of practice.
Actually, the Admiral makes Fernton Bridge in twenty-five minutes, arriving at
11.10, to find Denny waiting for him. Mrs. Mount arrives five minutes later. She
sees the boat but no Admiral. She moors at the rotten old raft and creeping round
the boat-house, which is derelict and water-logged, sees Denny and the Admiral
behind it. Now, Denny has the grimmest doubts about Walter. He thinks it quite
likely that Walter may do him in, as well as the Admiral. He has therefore come
armed with a knife—a relic of Chinese days, no doubt. Mrs. Mount calls out to
the Admiral: “Take care, Admiral! They mean to murder you.” The Admiral
(who has the grimmest doubts about Denny!) turns menacingly on Denny.
Denny loses his silly head, whips out the knife and stabs the Admiral. Mrs.
Mount shrieks and collapses.
7. At this distressing moment, enter Walter, having carried out his part of the
programme. He is aghast to find the Admiral dead, with a wound in him which
by no stretch of imagination could be inflicted by a railway engine—and Mrs.
Mount having hysterics in the background! He is furious with both Mrs. Mount
and Denny. They wrangle in angry whispers. Denny says he couldn’t help it.
Walter says he is a blasted idiot. Denny says, couldn’t they go on and carry out
the plan—perhaps the dagger-wound won’t be noticed in the general mess-up.
While they waste time in recriminations and in subduing Mrs. Mount—who is
showing every disposition to scream and attract people on the road—a distant
roar and rumble is heard, and the 11.24 thunders over the railway bridge. It is too
late. The only other train that night is the 11.25 and there is no time to do
anything about that.
8. Now what are they to do? Here they are with two boats, a car, a woman and
a corpse. The easiest thing would be to let the Admiral float peacefully out to
sea, but, with the tide running as it is, he would be down at the harbour in half an
hour. Somebody would find him—and then there would be enquiries at Rundel
Croft, and it is urgently necessary that Walter should go up there and collect the
papers. Then, too, the search would at once be made up-river; blood and
footprints would be discovered at Fernton Bridge. Much better to suggest that

the crime was committed elsewhere. The Vicar’s boat—the Vicar’s hat—why
not take the whole caboodle back to Rundel Croft and leave the Vicar to explain
things as best he can? Walter will take the car to the house and get the papers
and leave the forged permit-to-marry. Mrs. Mount and the miserable Denny
must get the boats back as best they can, stream or no stream.
9. “By the way,” says Walter, “how did Mrs. Mount get here?” After a certain
amount of harrying and bullying he gets the story out of her. Damn it! That
chauffeur must be got rid of! Here they are—it is already twelve o’clock (for
there has been a good deal of argument). No time to lose. Walter returns to the
car and drives along to the Vicarage. The car has gone! This is puzzling and
tiresome, but it is all the more imperative to make haste. He returns over Fernton
Bridge and drives to Rundel Croft, concealing the car somewhere off the road.
Here he gets in through the french window with Elma’s key, goes into the study
and starts hunting for the papers.
10. The Car. Meanwhile the hired chauffeur has been getting impatient. His
fare said she would only be a few minutes and here it is getting on for an hour.
Nobody seems to have opened the door to her. The Vicarage is as dark as a
tomb. He gets a strong impression that he has been bilked. He hoots violently
several times and then walks up to the side-door, which is the first he comes to,
and hammers on it. The Vicar, who sleeps over the side-door (servants and boys
on the river side of house) looks out. What is the matter? Some parishioner
dying? The chauffeur’s reply is unintelligible—to him—but he thinks he had
better come down and see what it is all about. Chauffeur says, Will the lady be
long, because he has got to get back to his garage, he has, for another job? Vicar
says, What lady?—Lady what came in here. Describes lady. Is he going to get
his money? Because, if not—shows every intention of making a disturbance.
The Vicar, who with extreme uneasiness has recognised the description of the
lady, does some quick thinking. At all costs a disturbance must be prevented. He
makes some sort of explanation and pays the man off, after taking his name and
the address of the garage. Then he returns and ponders. Where did his wife go?
Why did she come? Perhaps she is over at Rundel Croft. He goes down to the
boat-house. His boat is out. She must have gone across in it. He shakes his head
over this. Obviously the poor woman is still under that scoundrel’s thumb. What
will she do when she returns and finds the car gone? Obviously he must wait and
explain what has happened. He will drive her himself if necessary. He returns
and dresses; then sits in his bedroom to watch the road. (Why does not he watch
the boat-house? Because, if Walter returns with her there may be trouble and
possibly a noise—and then, the boys! the servants!—In any case she must return
to where she left the car, so he will wait at the high-road side of the house.)

11. Denny and Mrs. Mount are now left to bring the boats back. They swab up
the blood behind the old boat-house as best they can. Mrs. Mount, threatened by
Denny whom she has just seen kill a man, helps without protest. Denny puts the
Admiral’s coat on him—(or he put it on himself when he arrived)—and stuffs in
the pocket the evening paper which Walter or Denny brought to the meeting. (It
was purchased in Whynmouth that night or Walter brought it from town.) At
about one o’clock they start with the slack of the tide. They put the body in the
Vicar’s boat, unshipping the rowlocks, and putting Denny’s coat over it to hide
the face. This explains why the body is not wet with the dew. The Vicar’s boat
with the body in it is tied by the painter to the stern of the Admiral’s boat and
towed along. The incompetent Denny naturally ties it in one of those landsman’s
knots which nothing but a marlin-spike will ever undo, especially as the painter
has got wet and the new rope has swollen with the water. With a boat to tow and
two incompetent oarsmen, they do not make very good time, and the ghastly
dawn is breaking before they get up to Rundel Croft. Walter is there, chafing at
the delay. He has locked the window and brought the key, but in helping the
idiotic Denny alongside he drops the key. It falls, as he thinks, into the mud, but
actually into the Admiral’s boat and is kicked under the boards by Denny.
Anyway, they can’t search now. It is getting light. Damn Denny and his
inextricable knot! They hew the rope off with Denny’s knife and push the boat
with the body adrift. It dawdles out into the river and fetches up against the
opposite bank. Later, the tide frees it and carries it on up the river. They hack
and tear away the remains of the rope from the Admiral’s boat, having taken it
into the boat-house wrong end first. Then they return to Whynmouth in Denny’s
car, dropping Walter and Mrs. Mount. Walter retrieves his own car from
wherever he left it when he came from London and takes Mrs. Mount away in it
—and if that poor woman comes out of this business alive I shall be very much
surprised. (N.B.—Or Walter’s car can be used throughout. Or Walter and Mrs.
Mount may return to town by the milk-train. In any case these movements of
cars should be traceable.)
12. Holland. What has he been doing? He may, of course, have been
innocently in bed and asleep, but I think it would be more fun if he wasn’t. I
think that, after putting out his boots to be cleaned, he thought he would have
another shot at the Admiral. He went out, unseen by the Boots, sometime
between ten and eleven (not too early, or the family will not have returned from
the Vicarage). He strolls two and a half miles leisurely in his rubber-soled
canvas shoes. He reaches Rundel Croft say at 11.15 (Admiral at boat-house,
Elma upstairs). House dark. They are not in yet. He goes down to the boathouse. No boat. They are still at the Vicarage. Good. He goes for a stroll down

the road, keeping an eye on the house. No lights yet. Very odd. He muses on
love and marriage and recites the Ode to the Nightingale to fill up time. House
still dark. Can he have missed them? He goes down to the boat-house again.
Boat still out. No lights anywhere. Past midnight. Well, he can hardly knock
them up at this time of night. Hullo! Somebody has gone in by the drawing-room
window! Light in the study. He distinctly sees the Admiral’s bearded profile
(really Walter’s, of course, with the family resemblance) in the study. Curiouser
and curiouser. Where is the boat? He goes up to the house. The curtains have
now been drawn in the study, but there is a light in the drawing-room now. He
taps. Elma opens the window. She seems very much startled at seeing him. Can
he see the Admiral? No—Oh, no—but there is no need. The Admiral has
consented to the marriage. Look! Here is the written consent. Then, says
Holland, there is no need to go to London to-morrow. Oh, yes—let them do it
now, as it is all settled. In fact, the Admiral has only given his consent on the
understanding that she never darkens his french windows again. Has he, by Jove!
He’ll tell the blighter what he thinks of him. Please, no! that will only make
things worse. Please do as she tells him. Of course, darling—and she does love
him, doesn’t she?—Oh, of course, but please go now. Very well—but she is
looking so beautiful to-night. Very well. Good night, sweetheart.
Exit Holland to ramble round in a dream of ecstasy till he is ashamed to knock
up the Lord Marshall. Instead, he drifts round the harbour (where he may be seen
if necessary) till six, when he goes in, unseen by Boots who is occupied in the
bar. (Observe that Holland will now be ready to swear that he saw the Admiral
alive after midnight.)
When the news of the Admiral’s death comes along, he is worried. He must
see Elma. He goes to Rundel Croft, thinking that, as things are, she won’t want
to go through with the marriage. He is delayed by Inspector Rudge, and when he
gets free learns that Elma has gone to town as per schedule. He hastens after her,
and, feeling that there is going to be a lot of trouble about this business, marries
her. As his wife he can protect her. He sees, naturally, that it is impossible for
them to stay in town as she suggests—they will have to go back for the inquest
and funeral—but she is upset, and for the moment he humours her. (Note: He
says nothing to Rudge about his midnight excursion, fearing to be detained. He
will get hold of Elma first. Indeed, he may possibly at this point suspect Elma
himself.)
13. Elma. The emphasis laid on the time spent in calling Elma and in dressing
seems to me a little exaggerated. When she hears of the death, she is horrified.
She can hardly help suspecting Walter of some guilty knowledge, but hopes,
naturally, that the crime was committed by the other unknown man after Walter

left them. She feels faint and sick—but will Emery bring her a cup of tea and she
will try to pull herself together. Emery does so. Yes—she is better now—tell the
Inspector she will be down in a quarter of an hour. She thinks over what she had
better say. Nobody knows about Walter. Holland evidently thinks it was the
Admiral who came in at midnight. She had better say nothing. She hopes
Holland will say nothing without consulting her—in fact, he is probably already
in town. She must tell Jennie to pack. Her white frock will do to be married in—
she looks at it! Heavens! A smear of blood on the waist. Walter’s hand or coat
must have made the mark when he greeted her.
Then Walter—! Horrible. She hastily hides the dress, gets into her clothes and
comes down.

Elma will, of course, leave Holland to suppose that it was the Admiral he saw
in the study, since otherwise she will have to explain about Walter. But she will
have difficulty in explaining why she let Rudge suppose that she last saw the
Admiral at ten o’clock.
14. The Vicar. Goes out early in the morning. No one has come to the car.
What has happened? Finds his wife’s bag in summer-house and marks of high
heels on path leading from house to summer-house, also on flower-bed near
summer-house. (Note: It is the path between the summer-house and boat-house
that is of brick. The other garden paths will be of gravel.) Anxious to avoid
scandal, he takes a rake and fork and digs these over.
The weather has been hot and dry, but there has been rain on and off for a
week or so before. (Note: There has been no prolonged drought, or Neddy Ware
would have had something to say about its effect on the height of the river,
which appears to be at least normal.) Therefore the earth, when turned up, looks
suspiciously black and moist. After hearing of the murder the Vicar cannot help
suspecting his wife of complicity or guilty knowledge at least. He learns the
difference between preaching and practising the religious man’s duty to the
State. He conceals the bag and waters the dug-up patches.

He must now find his wife. He must know whether she is guilty or not (his
boys’ mother hanged for murder!!!). He hopes that she is not guilty and that by
proving to her that he is aware of her presence that night in his summer-house,
he may induce her to reveal what she knows about Walter. He cannot, of course,
supply this information himself, since it is impossible for him to reveal what he
heard in confession. He knows the address of the garage from which she hired
the car. As soon as he possibly can, without arousing the suspicions of the
police, he must get upon her track.
15. The Admiral’s pipe was left on the Vicar’s table during his visit. It has no
significance in the plot except that, when coupled with Holland’s story of having
seen the Admiral at Rundel Croft after midnight, it may serve to throw fresh
suspicion on the Vicar.

CHAPTER VIII
By Ronald A. Knox
CHAPTER 1.

The salient feature of the situation—none of the later contributors
have dealt with it—seems to me the fact that the body is in a boat at all. A
murder in a boat is very unlikely; but why put a body into a boat, when it would
be simpler to throw it into the stream? Unless, indeed, a very elaborate frame-up
is intended, the position of the boat on the river having been artificially
engineered so as to cast suspicion of murder upon some innocent person.
If Canon Whitechurch has any murderer in view at all, Ware should be the
man—we must assume that Canon Whitechurch respects the honour of the cloth.
Ceteris paribus, in a modern detective story the first person named is likely to be
the criminal.
In favour of Ware’s guilt, it must be observed that he claims not to recognise
Penistone’s corpse, though he had met him long before on the China station. It
does not seem probable that Ware would not know Penistone by sight after even
a month’s residence, in the height of the summer, since Ware was always
fishing, and Penistone kept a boat. Against Ware’s guilt, the fact that Penistone
has come to settle next door to him forms an improbable coincidence, if we are
to suppose that Ware harboured an old grudge against him.
I once laid it down that no Chinaman should appear in a detective story. I feel
inclined to extend the rule so as to apply to residents in China. It appears that
Admiral Penistone, Sir W. Denny, Walter Fitzgerald, Ware, and Holland are all
intimate with China, which seems overdoing it.

Chapter 2. I imagine that the Coles meant to incriminate Elma, though they
may have had their eye on Denny.
Chapter 3. Wade seems to suspect Elma; the packing up or concealing of her
evening things points this way. (Why did she dress up to meet the Vicar? This
must be considered.) The words “And if it was …” in Chapter III seem more
designed to incriminate Ware; so does Appleton’s theory of the murder having
taken place up-stream.
Does dew form on boats floating in rivers? The encyclopædia gives me no
help.
Chapter 4. Mrs. Christie seems suspicious of Denny; he is hard up,
Penistone’s change of residence is attributed to a desire to be near him, and,
according to Mrs. Davis, Denny was none too pleased over it. On the ordinary
principles of a mystery story, this should mean that Penistone is blackmailing
Denny. I cannot find out what is the importance, if any, of the Vicar’s runaway
wife. She left her husband in 1920, well after the War, so it seems difficult to
identify her with Elma, who was with her uncle at that time. How far is
Whynmouth from London?
Chapter 5. Rhode seems to be fixing it on Holland. Penistone might have gone
to Whynmouth to interview Holland, who met and murdered him, and conveyed
him up-stream; afterwards transferring the corpse into the Vicar’s boat, and
running the other boat in head first. But of course Denny is under suspicion,
from the position of his house. And again, Ware’s insistence that the murder was
committed down-stream might be an effort to exculpate the real criminal,
himself. How far up was the river tidal?
Chapter 6. Kennedy seems to point to the Vicar. If not, why was the weapon
taken from the Vicarage summer-house? (Unless caught up at random.) And
why does the Vicar water the garden so thoroughly, if he is not obliterating
footprints? (I take it we are not to fix a juvenile crime on the sons.) I do not
understand the woman in the car. If she was Elma, I do not see how she got
there. If anybody else, she is a new character, not mentioned in the first five
chapters, and therefore on my own principles not the criminal. She might be the
Vicar’s runaway wife; but it seems a coincidence that she should have happened
to pay a call on a night so accidentée already.
Chapter 7. I suppose Miss Sayers thinks the Vicar knew something about it
all. The length of the rope ought to indicate that the Vicarage boat was twice
moored that night, and loosed each time by a cutting of the painter from a
position of disadvantage; hence the missing two feet of rope, which should be
hanging up somewhere, unless deliberately removed since the murder. The
double loosing of the boat suggests either that there were two separate plots

afoot, or else that there has been a very elaborate frame-up.
The return of the Hollands, with their story of having seen Penistone alive
after midnight, seems to put a wholly new complexion on the story; I wish I
could discover what. If the permission to marry was genuine, their motive for
murder ceases, and their motive for hurry is difficult to see. If they were the
murderers, why throw suspicion on themselves by their haste to marry? It all
beats me, and I wish she had not left me to conduct the interview.
Anyhow, this is my solution:
Walter Fitzgerald took strongly after his mother and could, with make-up,
pass as the Admiral, his uncle. It was probably thus that he managed to shift a
peccadillo of his own in Shanghai on to his uncle’s shoulders. The Admiral
suspected this; which is why he collected papers in his desk calculated to blast
Walter’s reputation if he reappeared in Europe. Almost more important, the
Admiral held and was suppressing papers which would have proved Walter’s
innocence in the matter of forgery, and would have made it possible for him to
reappear in Society. Walter survived the War, and ran away with Celia Mount,
the Vicar’s wife, in 1920. Celia, to further his interests, went to act as (French)
maid to Elma, the sister. Elma knew that her brother meant to recover the papers,
but not that he intended to murder, and thus silence, his uncle. The Admiral
came to Lingham so as to be near Denny, whom he was blackmailing. Celia,
finding her husband so close, went to see him and urged him to divorce her. He
refused on conscientious grounds. She left, having taken a wax impression of the
key of the Admiral’s desk.
Holland had somehow become an enemy of Walter’s in China. Walter
therefore decided to saddle him with whatever suspicion attached to the murder.
Elma was not in love with Holland, but wanted to marry him so as to get the full
control of her own money. Penistone refused his consent, because he suspected
Holland, whom he had met in Sir Wilfrid’s house, of acting in Sir Wilfrid’s
interests.
Walter and Celia, on the fatal night, motored down to Lingham. They knew
from Elma the plans of the Rundel Croft household. Celia was put down at the
Vicarage, where she found the Vicar in the garden, and persuaded him to ferry
her across in his boat and detain the Admiral in conversation, while she went
into the study and secured the papers “needed to save an innocent man.” The
Vicar had to cut his painter, owing to the state of the tide. Celia secured the
papers, about 10.30; and sent a telephone message as from Elma (who was
upstairs, ignorant of her presence) asking Holland to come round at midnight.
Meanwhile (the Vicar still talking to the Admiral) Walter has gone to the inn and
posed as Penistone, hoping thus to implicate Holland. (It would be found that he

had not taken the train, and that Holland had gone out at night; it would be
assumed that the murder had taken place, and the body set adrift, at or near
Whynmouth. Perhaps the plotters made a mistake about the tides.) Then Walter
returned to Rundel Croft, where he either murdered Penistone, or found him
murdered by Celia (caught in her act of theft). The Vicar, who was scheduled to
keep the Admiral in talk till (say) eleven, was waiting at the boat-house, and
ferried Celia across; she told him to go to bed, the chauffeur would pick her up.
Actually she returned, stumbling over flower-beds, to the river, cut the painter a
second time (she was much shorter than Mount) and rejoined Walter. He,
meanwhile, had put Penistone’s body into its greatcoat, and thrust a paper into
the pocket to suggest that Penistone had really gone to Whynmouth. He meant to
put the body into the Admiral’s boat, but imagined that this would be the one
moored by its bows; hence actually he put the body in the Vicar’s boat (where
the hat had been left by accident) and, using the Admiral’s boat, towed boat and
body out to midstream; then cut adrift. Celia pointed out the mistake when he
landed, but it was too late to do anything; Holland’s steps were heard on the
gravel. Walter rushed into the study and personated the Admiral, showing
Holland the forged consent. He left this in an envelope for Elma (who knew it
was a forgery); Holland went home, letting himself in by a door he had left
unlocked; Walter and Celia got off in their car.
On the discovery of the body, Elma hastened to marry Holland, thinking that
Walter was the murderer and she would lose another chance of marrying;
Holland hastened to marry Elma, chivalrously, because he thought she would be
under suspicion. Denny, hearing (from Emery) that documents had been taken
from the desk, dashed up to London, to know what was being done with those
which compromised him. Mount found the extra coil hanging to the mooringpost, did not understand it, but destroyed it to screen his wife, which was also
why he obliterated her footmarks on the bed. The white dress (which had been
worn by Elma because she wanted to attract the Vicar, hoping to persuade him to
divorce Celia) was taken up to London because it was the nearest thing she had
got to a wedding-dress.
The precise time of the murder and the precise distance to which the corpse
was towed by Walter are to be settled by the tide experts. Walter wanted to make
it look as if the boat had been drifted up with the tide all, or most of, the way
from Whynmouth. The key was left in the Admiral’s boat by Celia. This was
meant to suggest that Penistone had left all locked when he (supposedly) went to
Whynmouth; and would have done so but for Walter’s confusion of the two
boats. Celia had a false key to the french window, as well as to the desk.
The plotters assumed that Holland’s story would be disbelieved, and that he

would be thought to have murdered Penistone at or near Whynmouth round
about eleven o’clock.

CHAPTER IX
By Freeman Wills Crofts
afternoon before the crime, Walter calls on Celia, whom he has fixed up
at the Judd Street hotel. After he leaves, she somehow suspects what is going to
be done that night. She is horror-struck and resolves at all costs to save
Penistone. She will enlist Mount’s help, who, through her confession, knows the
circumstances. The five-thirty train has gone, so she travels by the seven to
Drychester and motors to the Vicarage. The house seems shut up and before
knocking she goes to see if Mount is in the summer-house. While making up her
mind to knock, she sees Penistone starting. She grasps the knife and what she
thinks is her bag and rushes to the river, shouting as loud as she can. But the
Admiral doesn’t hear her. She thinks it may be too late if she goes for Mount, so
she follows Penistone herself. If desirable, she can have seen (or felt?) the knife
in the summer-house. She cannot untie the painter, so runs back for the knife.
She comes on Penistone’s boat about half a mile down the river. (If it was at
the bridge, there would not be time for Walter to get back to personate
Penistone.) There she finds Walter and Denny, and the Admiral already
murdered. Denny seems almost out of his mind with fear. She is horrified. She
fears Walter is guilty, but she doesn’t know. They tell her Penistone committed
suicide. She doesn’t believe it, but she doesn’t know. Weakly, she takes no step.
Walter sends her to his car, which is hidden close by. He and Denny row the
boats back and shove both into the Rundel Croft boat-house. Denny waits while
Walter goes up and steals the papers—which clear Penistone’s character,
incidentally revealing the trick Walter and Denny have played on him in China.
Walter tells Elma what has happened. She is aghast, but cannot do anything
without destroying Walter, of whom she is so rond. She decides to know nothing
about what has happened.
Walter has prepared the consent, and this he gives to Holland. When Holland
goes, Walter and Denny put the body into the Vicar’s boat, as the best thing they
can think of, and send the boat adrift. They had intended to throw it into the
river, but the Vicar’s boat seems a better idea. This putting the boats into the
boat-house accounts for the boat’s tidal movements, as also the clothing on the
body being dry.
ON THE

Denny then walks home, letting himself in unseen. Walter takes Celia to
London, but because he is afraid of her giving the show away he takes her on to
Paris till the storm blows over.
It should be explained that Celia took the Vicar’s hat by mistake, and
therefore left her bag behind. In this bag Mount found the Drychester and
London addresses.

Chronology
The dates appear to be as follows:
Monday, 8th August.—New moon.
Tuesday, 9th August.—Penistone dines with Mount. The murder in the
evening.
Wednesday, 10th August.—Discovery of body. Rudge investigates up
to end of 39 Articles.
Thursday, 11th August.—Rudge reports to his superiors and
investigates lives of Rundel Croft household.
Friday, 12th August.—The inquest. Rudge goes to Drychester and
London.
Saturday, 13th August.—Rudge finds Judd Street hotel.
Monday, 15th August.—Rudge goes to Drychester and reports to
Super.

CHAPTER X
By Edgar Jepson
is the murderer. He has a beard and strongly resembles his uncle the
Admiral, whom he impersonated at the Lord Marshall. After the crime he returns
to Rundel Croft, sees his sister, whose help he enlists by means of some
explanation that does not give the real facts, is mistaken by Holland for the
Admiral, while he is searching for File X, which contains the truth about the
Hong Kong incident and Walter’s share in it, and then goes upstairs to shave off
his dangerous beard in the bathroom. By this means he is able to go
unrecognised, and keep in touch with the situation, by posing as the reporter for
the Evening Gazette.
WALTER

CHAPTER XI

By Clemence Dane
HERE,

roughly, are the points I have made. Célie, the French maid, and the
Vicar’s wife are one person. She has been living with Walter, the murderer, or at
any rate, there is a tie of some sort between them, and she knows enough to
make her dangerous. He knows that she has gone down to consult her former
husband (or for any purpose anybody likes to invent) and desires to divert
suspicion from himself, and on to the Vicar by a second murder; or, alternately
thinks that she intends to give him away. Anyway, he follows her down.
She has gone to the Vicarage, found her husband is out, and the maids also. (A
genuine accident this: they had been given a day’s holiday by the Vicar. He and
they have gone to a local flower-show at some distance, or a village outing of
some sort.) She has also written to the Hollands to meet her there, for purposes
of consultation.
Célie, not knowing that the Vicar’s absence is more than temporary, wanders
into the garden, and there picks the greengages, then comes back to the house
and encounters Walter. There is some sort of an argument. At any rate he
murders her, arranging it to look like suicide, and leaves only a few minutes
before the Inspector arrives. Walter thinks himself unseen, but later it must
transpire that one of the villagers has seen him. He has a perfectly good excuse:
he has called to see the Vicar in pursuit of his reporter’s duties, and, like
everyone else, has found the house empty. The Inspector, however, knows that
Célie has been in the garden within ten minutes of his own arrival—the wet
greengage stones and the handkerchief—and that therefore she must have
encountered Walter, who would have just had time to murder her and leave
without running into Rudge.
If more time is needed, the handkerchief and greengage stones can be found
lying in the shade and would thus take longer to dry. The other importance of the
greengage clue is Rudge’s deduction from it, before Walter’s recognition by a
villager happens, that a woman who strolls cheerfully into a garden and eats
greengages is not likely to commit suicide three minutes later. The funeral card
is a false clue: it is really written by one of the servants or by the Vicar himself,
and is a genuine message to any possible caller. Or it might be a fake message
written in the Vicar’s handwriting by Walter in order to avoid the discovery of
the murder for several hours. I don’t know how to explain Elma and Holland’s
share or non-share in the business. It’s quite inexplicable to me. So I have gone
on the ground that they are two perfectly innocent people, and that all the

evidence that points to them is purely accidental. I am, frankly, in a complete
muddle as to what has happened, and have tried to write a chapter that anybody
can use to prove anything they like.

APPENDIX II
NOTES ON MOORING OF BOAT
(Extract from letter from John Rhode)
I, TOO,

wanted it to be necessary to get into the boat in order to cast it off or make
it fast again. Now, as it happens, in a river with a considerable rise and fall of
tide (as this river must have had, to account for the swiftness of the ebb and flow
of the tidal stream), this is nearly always necessary, if it is desired to keep the
boat afloat at all states of the tide. One method of mooring a boat under these
circumstances is as I visualised it.
The mooring-post is driven into the bed of the stream, beyond low-water
mark, in water deep enough to float the boat at all times. A hard, made of a few
loads of stone, is run from the bank to low-water mark, to save ploughing
through the mud. A ring-bolt is fixed at the shore end of this hard.
Now, having been out in the boat, you want to come ashore. Right. Make fast
the painter to the mooring-post. Pole the boat round till her stern touches the
hard. Jump ashore, taking with you the end of a light line, made fast at the other
end to the ring in the stern of the boat. Then push the boat off again, and make
fast your end of the line to the ring-bolt on shore, adjusting the length of the line
so that the boat lies parallel, during the ebb, with the bank.
Having had your drink, you want to put off again. Cast off the line, and haul
the stern of the boat in till it touches the hard. Jump in with the line up in the
stern. Go forward, haul in on painter till you are near enough to the post, then
cast off.
I gather that you want someone to get into the boat and cast off the painter. As
you will see, unless the boat is approached by water, this is necessary in any
case. In describing the incident, remember how the boat swings. During the ebb
the boat lies as described. But during the flood the stern will swing in of itself,
and will remain touching the shore throughout the flood. This, of course, does
not matter since the water is rising.
Remember, too, that any particular point in the tidal phase occurs (near
enough for this purpose) about three-quarters of an hour later on successive
days. Don’t make it high-water at 10 a.m. one day and low-water at 11 a.m. the
next. Also, in a river like this, the tide ebbs longer than it flows. I laid down
rules for this particular river, though I don’t remember them exactly now, for the

guidance of those who followed.
As for the distance of the pole from high-water mark, you can, within limits,
make this to suit yourself. If you allow twelve feet or more, measuring
horizontally, between H.W.O.S.T. and L.W.O.S.T., and six feet or more between
L.W.O.S.T. and the post, you won’t be far wrong. These distances can be
increased almost indefinitely, but I shouldn’t decrease them much, or you will
make your bank awkwardly steep.

COUNSEL’S OPINION ON FITZGERALD’S WILL
looked up your point in the library this afternoon and the result of my
researches, for what they are worth, is that it certainly has been held again and
again, where a certain person’s consent to marriage was required and that person
had died by act of God, or at least by no fault of the beneficiary, the condition
requiring a particular consent is void.
None of the cases run the thing so fine that there is only twenty-four hours
between the death of the person whose consent is required and the wedding of
the beneficiary who wants an absolute title to the property, and I think it would
be necessary, where the death is within twenty-four hours of the ceremony, for
the beneficiary, in order to get her absolute right, if there were any contest, to
show:
HAVE

Either (1) That she intended to ask the necessary consent before the
marriage ceremony;
(2) That she was prevented by the death, and would have had time to
ask consent but for the death;
and (3) If suggested that the death was any fault of hers, to defend
herself against the allegation;
or else That the ceremony was not arranged until after death had made
it impossible to obtain the necessary consent. Provided this last is true,
it matters not how soon after the death the beneficiary claims to treat
the condition as void.
As to the last possibility, I am no authority on marriage licences, but from the
books it appears that provided one party has resided fifteen days in the locality in
which it is intended the marriage should take place, notice may be given to the
registrar by that party and a marriage licence obtained from the registrar after the
lapse of one full week-day—in law language in forty-two to forty-eight hours,
provided Sunday does not intervene.

This procedure is applicable to marriages in any other place than the
established church, i.e., registrar’s office, or Nonconformist place of worship
licensed for marriages.
Without the fifteen days of previous residence the business takes longer.
Once obtained a marriage licence is available for quite a long time: three
months I think, but you might verify this. It is possible that one of your parties
had got a licence and was waiting for a favourable opportunity for the
beneficiary to ask the necessary consent. This sort of licence is only granted for
marriage in a particular place. See Whitaker.
In the case of conditions, subsequent, if the condition is impossible through
the act of God, the gift remains, tho’ there may be a gift over on nonperformance of the condition. For instance, if the person whose consent to a
marriage is required dies before the marriage.
Collett v Collett. 35. B. 312.
In this case the widowed mother’s consent to marriage was required. The
mother died in 1856.
In July, 1865, her daughter Helena married.
Master of the Rolls held “that the gift over (i.e., to remainder man in case of
life tenancy only) will not take effect, if the performance of the condition has
become impossible thro’ the act of God, and no default of the person who had to
perform it.
“Here it is reasonably certain that the mother, if she had lived, would have
given her consent to this marriage, one eligible in all respects.”
The principle is the presumption of the testator not requiring the performance
of impossibilities, and that his intention will be substantially carried into effect
by permitting it to be executed as far as can be done.
“The condition having become impossible by act of God, her estate for life is
become absolute.” Aislabie v. Rice. 3 Mad. 25 C.




