p

q

They do it
with Mirrors

3

To Mathew Prichard

5

Contents
About Agatha Christie
The Agatha Christie Collection
E-Book Extras
Chapters
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23
Epilogue
Copyright
www.agathachristie.com
About the Publisher



Chapter 1

I
Mrs Van Rydock moved a little back from the mirror
and sighed.
‘Well, that’ll have to do,’ she murmured. ‘Think it’s
all right, Jane?’
Miss Marple eyed the Lanvanelli creation appraisingly.
‘It seems to me a very beautiful gown,’ she said.
‘The gown’s all right,’ said Mrs Van Rydock and
sighed.
‘Take if off, Stephanie,’ she said.
The elderly maid with the grey hair and the small
pinched mouth eased the gown carefully up over Mrs
Van Rydock’s upstretched arms.
Mrs Van Rydock stood in front of the glass in her
peach satin slip. She was exquisitely corseted. Her still
shapely legs were encased in ﬁne nylon stockings. Her
face, beneath a layer of cosmetics and constantly toned
7


up by massage, appeared almost girlish at a slight distance. Her hair was less grey than tending to hydrangea
blue and was perfectly set. It was practically impossible
when looking at Mrs Van Rydock to imagine what she
would be like in a natural state. Everything that money
could do had been done for her – reinforced by diet,
massage, and constant exercises.
Ruth Van Rydock looked humorously at her friend.
‘Do you think most people would guess, Jane, that
you and I are practically the same age?’
Miss Marple responded loyally.
‘Not for a moment, I’m sure,’ she said reassuringly.
‘I’m afraid, you know, that I look every minute of
my age!’
Miss Marple was white-haired, with a soft pink and
white wrinkled face and innocent china blue eyes. She
looked a very sweet old lady. Nobody would have
called Mrs Van Rydock a sweet old lady.
‘I guess you do, Jane,’ said Mrs Van Rydock. She
grinned suddenly, ‘And so do I. Only not in the same
way. “Wonderful how that old hag keeps her ﬁgure.”
That’s what they say of me. But they know I’m an old
hag all right! And, my God, do I feel like one!’
She dropped heavily on to the satin quilted chair.
‘That’s all right, Stephanie,’ she said. ‘You can go.’
Stephanie gathered up the dress and went out.
‘Good old Stephanie,’ said Ruth Van Rydock. ‘She’s
8

They do it with Mirrors

been with me for over thirty years now. She’s the only
woman who knows what I really look like! Jane, I want
to talk to you.’
Miss Marple leant forward a little. Her face took
on a receptive expression. She looked, somehow, an
incongruous ﬁgure in the ornate bedroom of the expensive hotel suite. She was dressed in rather dowdy
black, carried a large shopping bag and looked every
inch a lady.
‘I’m worried, Jane. About Carrie Louise.’
‘Carrie Louise?’ Miss Marple repeated the name
musingly. The sound of it took her a long way back.
The pensionnat in Florence. Herself, the pink and
white English girl from a Cathedral Close. The two
Martin girls, Americans, exciting to the English girl
because of their quaint ways of speech and their forthright manner and vitality. Ruth, tall, eager, on top of
the world; Carrie Louise, small, dainty, wistful.
‘When did you see her last, Jane?’
‘Oh! not for many many years. It must be twenty-ﬁve
at least. Of course we still send cards at Christmas.’
Such an odd thing, friendship! She, young Jane
Marple, and the two Americans. Their ways diverging
almost at once, and yet the old affection persisting;
occasional letters, remembrances at Christmas. Strange
that Ruth whose home – or rather homes – had been
in America should be the sister whom she had seen
9

p

q

the more often of the two. No, perhaps not strange.
Like most Americans of her class, Ruth had been
cosmopolitan, every year or two she had come over
to Europe, rushing from London to Paris, on to the
Riviera, and back again, and always keen to snatch a few
moments wherever she was with her old friends. There
had been many meetings like this one. In Claridge’s,
or the Savoy, or the Berkeley, or the Dorchester. A
recherché meal, affectionate reminiscences, and a hurried and affectionate goodbye. Ruth had never had time
to visit St Mary Mead. Miss Marple had not, indeed,
ever expected it. Everyone’s life has a tempo. Ruth’s was
presto whereas Miss Marple’s was content to be adagio.
So it was American Ruth whom she had seen most
of, whereas Carrie Louise who lived in England, she
had not now seen for over twenty years. Odd, but
quite natural, because when one lives in the same
country there is no need to arrange meetings with
old friends. One assumes that, sooner or later, one
will see them without contrivance. Only, if you move
in different spheres, that does not happen. The paths
of Jane Marple and Carrie Louise did not cross. It was
as simple as that.
‘Why are you worried about Carrie Louise, Ruth?’
asked Miss Marple.
‘In a way that’s what worries me most! I just don’t
know.’
10

They do it with Mirrors

‘She’s not ill?’
‘She’s very delicate – always has been. I wouldn’t
say she’d been any worse than usual – considering that
she’s getting on just as we all are.’
‘Unhappy?’
‘Oh no.’
No, it wouldn’t be that, thought Miss Marple. It
would be difﬁcult to imagine Carrie Louise unhappy
– and yet there were times in her life when she must
have been. Only – the picture did not come clearly.
Bewildered – yes – incredulous – yes – but violent
grief – no.
Mrs Van Rydock’s words came appositely.
‘Carrie Louise,’ she said, ‘has always lived right out
of this world. She doesn’t know what it’s like. Maybe
it’s that that worries me.’
‘Her circumstances,’ began Miss Marple, then
stopped, shaking her head. ‘No,’ she said.
‘No, it’s she herself,’ said Ruth Van Rydock. ‘Carrie
Louise was always the one of us who had ideals. Of
course it was the fashion when we were young to have
ideals – we all had them, it was the proper thing for
young girls. You were going to nurse lepers, Jane, and I
was going to be a nun. One gets over all that nonsense.
Marriage, I suppose one might say, knocks it out of
one. Still, take it by and large, I haven’t done badly
out of marriage.’
11

p

q

Miss Marple thought that Ruth was expressing it
mildly. Ruth had been married three times, each time
to an extremely wealthy man, and the resultant divorces
had increased her bank balance without in the least
souring her disposition.
‘Of course,’ said Mrs Van Rydock, ‘I’ve always been
tough. Things don’t get me down. I’ve not expected
too much of life and certainly not expected too much
of men – and I’ve done very well out of it – and no
hard feelings. Tommy and I are still excellent friends,
and Julius often asks me my opinion about the market.’
Her face darkened. ‘I believe that’s what worries me
about Carrie Louise – she’s always had a tendency,
you know, to marry cranks.’
‘Cranks?’
‘People with ideals. Carrie Louise was always a
pushover for ideals. There she was, as pretty as they
make them, just seventeen and listening with her eyes as
big as saucers to old Gulbrandsen holding forth about
his plans for the human race. Over ﬁfty, and she married him, a widower with a family of grown-up children
– all because of his philanthropic ideas. She used to
sit listening to him spellbound. Just like Desdemona
and Othello. Only fortunately there was no Iago about
to mess things up – and anyway Gulbrandsen wasn’t
coloured. He was a Swede or a Norwegian or something.’
12

They do it with Mirrors

Miss Marple nodded thoughtfully. The name of
Gulbrandsen had an international signiﬁcance. A man
who with shrewd business acumen and perfect honesty had built up a fortune so colossal that really
philanthropy had been the only solution to the disposal of it. The name still held signiﬁcance. The
Gulbrandsen Trust, the Gulbrandsen Research Fellowships, the Gulbrandsen Administrative Almshouses,
and best known of all the vast educational College
for the sons of working men.
‘She didn’t marry him for his money, you know,’ said
Ruth, ‘I should have if I’d married him at all. But not
Carrie Louise. I don’t know what would have happened
if he hadn’t died when she was thirty-two. Thirty-two’s
a very nice age for a widow. She’s got experience, but
she’s still adaptable.’
The spinster listening to her, nodded gently whilst
her mind revived, tentatively, widows she had known
in the village of St Mary Mead.
‘I was really happiest about Carrie Louise when she
was married to Johnnie Restarick. Of course he married
her for her money – or if not exactly that, at any rate
he wouldn’t have married her if she hadn’t had any.
Johnnie was a selﬁsh, pleasure-loving, lazy hound, but
that’s so much safer than a crank. All Johnnie wanted
was to live soft. He wanted Carrie Louise to go to the
best dressmakers and have yachts and cars and enjoy
13

p

q

herself with him. That kind of man is so very safe.
Give him comfort and luxury and he’ll purr like a
cat and be absolutely charming to you. I never took
that scene designing and theatrical stuff of his very
seriously. But Carrie Louise was thrilled by it – saw
it all as Art with a capital A and really forced him
back into those surroundings, and then that dreadful
Yugoslavian woman got hold of him and just swept
him off with her. He didn’t really want to go. If Carrie
Louise had waited and been sensible, he would have
come back to her.’
‘Did she care very much?’ asked Miss Marple.
‘That’s the funny thing. I don’t really believe she
did. She was absolutely sweet about it all – but then
she would be. She is sweet. Quite anxious to divorce
him so that he and that creature could get married.
And offering to give those two boys of his by his ﬁrst
marriage a home with her because it would be more
settled for them. So there poor Johnnie was – he had to
marry the woman and she led him an awful six months
and then drove him over a precipice in a car in a ﬁt of
rage. They said it was an accident, but I think it was
just temper!’
Mrs Van Rydock paused, took up a mirror and gazed
at her face searchingly. She picked up her eyebrow
tweezers and pulled out a hair.
‘And what does Carrie Louise do next but marry
14

They do it with Mirrors

this man Lewis Serrocold. Another crank! Another
man with ideals! Oh, I don’t say he isn’t devoted to
her – I think he is – but he’s bitten by that same bug
of wanting to improve everybody’s lives for them. And
really, you know, nobody can do that but yourself.’
‘I wonder,’ said Miss Marple.
‘Only, of course, there’s a fashion in these things,
just like there is in clothes. (My dear, have you seen
what Christian Dior is trying to make us wear in the
way of skirts?) Where was I? Oh yes, Fashion. Well
there’s a fashion in philanthropy too. It used to be
education in Gulbrandsen’s day. But that’s out of
date now. The State has stepped in. Everyone expects
education as a matter of right – and doesn’t think much
of it when they get it! Juvenile Delinquency – that’s
what is the rage nowadays. All these young criminals
and potential criminals. Everyone’s mad about them.
You should see Lewis Serrocold’s eyes sparkle behind
those thick glasses of his. Crazy with enthusiasm! One
of those men of enormous will power who like living
on a banana and a piece of toast and put all their
energies into a Cause. And Carrie Louise eats it up
– just as she always did. But I don’t like it, Jane.
They’ve had meetings of the Trustees and the whole
place has been turned over to this new idea. It’s a
training establishment now for these juvenile criminals,
complete with psychiatrists and psychologists and all
15

p

q

the rest of it. There Lewis and Carrie Louise are, living
there, surrounded by these boys – who aren’t perhaps
quite normal. And the place stiff with occupational
therapists and teachers and enthusiasts, half of them
quite mad. Cranks, all the lot of them, and my little
Carrie Louise in the middle of it all!’
She paused – and stared helplessly at Miss Marple.
Miss Marple said in a faintly puzzled voice:
‘But you haven’t told me yet, Ruth, what you are
really afraid of.’
‘I tell you, I don’t know! And that’s what worries me.
I’ve just been down there – for a ﬂying visit. And I felt
all along that there was something wrong. In the atmosphere – in the house – I know I’m not mistaken. I’m
sensitive to atmosphere, always have been. Did I ever
tell you how I urged Julius to sell out of Amalgamated
Cereals before the crash came? And wasn’t I right? Yes,
something is wrong down there. But I don’t know why
or what – if it’s these dreadful young jailbirds – or if
it’s nearer home. I can’t say what it is. There’s Lewis
just living for his ideas and not noticing anything else,
and Carrie Louise, bless her, never seeing or hearing
or thinking anything except what’s a lovely sight, or
a lovely sound, or a lovely thought. It’s sweet but it
isn’t practical. There is such a thing as evil – and I
want you, Jane, to go down there right away and ﬁnd
out just exactly what’s the matter.’
16

They do it with Mirrors

‘Me?’ exclaimed Miss Marple. ‘Why me?’
‘Because you’ve got a nose for that sort of thing.
You always had. You’ve always been a sweet innocentlooking creature, Jane, and all the time underneath
nothing has ever surprised you, you always believe
the worst.’
‘The worst is so often true,’ murmured Miss Marple.
‘Why you have such a poor idea of human nature,
I can’t think – living in that sweet peaceful village of
yours, so old world and pure.’
‘You have never lived in a village, Ruth. The things
that go on in a pure peaceful village would probably
surprise you.’
‘Oh I daresay. My point is that they don’t surprise
you. So you will go down to Stonygates and ﬁnd out
what’s wrong, won’t you?’
‘But, Ruth dear, that would be a most difﬁcult
thing to do.’
‘No, it wouldn’t. I’ve thought it all out. If you won’t
be absolutely mad at me, I’ve prepared the ground
already.’
Mrs Van Rydock paused, eyed Miss Marple rather
uneasily, lighted a cigarette, and plunged rather nervously into explanation.
‘You’ll admit, I’m sure, that things have been difﬁcult in this country since the war, for people with small
ﬁxed incomes – for people like you, that is to say, Jane.’
17

p

q

‘Oh yes, indeed. But for the kindness, the really great
kindness of my nephew Raymond, I don’t know really
where I should be.’
‘Never mind your nephew,’ said Mrs Van Rydock.
‘Carrie Louise knows nothing about your nephew – or
if she does, she knows him as a writer and has no idea
that he’s your nephew. The point, as I put it to Carrie
Louise, is that it’s just too bad about dear Jane. Really
sometimes hardly enough to eat, and of course, far too
proud ever to appeal to old friends. One couldn’t, I
said, suggest money – but a nice long rest in lovely
surroundings, with an old friend and with plenty of
nourishing food, and no cares or worries’ – Ruth Van
Rydock paused and then added deﬁantly, ‘Now go on
– be mad at me if you want to be.’
Miss Marple opened her china blue eyes in gentle
surprise.
‘But why should I be mad at you, Ruth? A very
ingenious and plausible approach. I’m sure Carrie
Louise responded.’
‘She’s writing to you. You’ll ﬁnd the letter when you
get back. Honestly, Jane, you don’t feel that I’ve taken
an unpardonable liberty? You won’t mind –’
She hesitated and Miss Marple put her thoughts
deftly into words.
‘Going to Stonygates as an object of charity – more
or less under false pretences? Not in the least – if it is
18

They do it with Mirrors

necessary. You think it is necessary – and I am inclined
to agree with you.’
Mrs Van Rydock stared at her.
‘But why? What have you heard?’
‘I haven’t heard anything. It’s just your conviction.
You’re not a fanciful woman, Ruth.’
‘No, but I haven’t anything deﬁnite to go upon.’
‘I remember,’ said Miss Marple thoughtfully, ‘one
Sunday morning at church – it was the second Sunday
in Advent – sitting behind Grace Lamble and feeling
more and more worried about her. Quite sure, you
know, that something was wrong – badly wrong – and
yet being quite unable to say why. A most disturbing
feeling and very very deﬁnite.’
‘And was there something wrong?’
‘Oh yes. Her father, the old Admiral, had been very
peculiar for some time, and the very next day he went
for her with the coal hammer, roaring out that she was
Antichrist masquerading as his daughter. He nearly
killed her. They took him away to the asylum and she
eventually recovered after months in hospital – but it
was a very near thing.’
‘And you’d actually had a premonition that day in
church?’
‘I wouldn’t call it a premonition. It was founded on
fact – these things usually are, though one doesn’t
always recognise it at the time. She was wearing her
19

p

q

Sunday hat the wrong way round. Very signiﬁcant,
really, because Grace Lamble was a most precise
woman, not at all vague or absent-minded – and
the circumstances under which she would not notice
which way her hat was put on to go to church
were really extremely limited. Her father, you see,
had thrown a marble paperweight at her and it had
shattered the looking-glass. She had caught up her
hat, put it on, and hurried out of the house. Anxious
to keep up appearances and for the servants not to hear
anything. She put down these actions, you see, to “dear
Papa’s Naval temper,” she didn’t realise that his mind
was deﬁnitely unhinged. Though she ought to have
realised it clearly enough. He was always complaining
to her of being spied upon and of enemies – all the
usual symptoms, in fact.’
Mrs Van Rydock gazed respectfully at her friend.
‘Maybe, Jane,’ she said, ‘that St Mary Mead of
yours isn’t quite the idyllic retreat that I’ve always
imagined it.’
‘Human nature, dear, is very much the same everywhere. It is more difﬁcult to observe it closely in a city,
that is all.’
‘And you’ll go to Stonygates?’
‘I’ll go to Stonygates. A little unfair, perhaps, on
my nephew Raymond. To let it be thought that he
does not assist me, I mean. Still, the dear boy is in
20

They do it with Mirrors

Mexico for six months. And by that time it should all
be over.’
‘What should all be over?’
‘Carrie Louise’s invitation will hardly be for an
indeﬁnite stay. Three weeks, perhaps – a month. That
should be ample.’
‘For you to ﬁnd out what is wrong?’
‘For me to ﬁnd out what is wrong.’
‘My, Jane,’ said Mrs Van Rydock, ‘you’ve got a lot
of conﬁdence in yourself, haven’t you?’
Miss Marple looked faintly reproachful.
‘You have conﬁdence in me, Ruth. Or so you say . . .
I can only assure you that I shall endeavour to justify
your conﬁdence.’

21

p

q

■
B
L
A
N
K
P
A
G
E
22
■
22

Chapter 2

I
Before catching her train back to St Mary Mead
(Wednesday special cheap day return), Miss Marple,
in a precise and businesslike fashion, collected certain data.
‘Carrie Louise and I have corresponded after a
fashion, but it has largely been a matter of Christmas
cards or calendars. It’s just the facts I should like, Ruth
dear – and also some idea as to whom exactly I shall
encounter in the household at Stonygates.’
‘Well, you know about Carrie Louise’s marriage to
Gulbrandsen. There were no children and Carrie Louise
took that very much to heart. Gulbrandsen was a widower, and had three grown-up sons. Eventually they
adopted a child. Pippa, they called her – a lovely little
creature. She was just two years old when they got her.’
‘Where did she come from? What was her background?’
23

p

q

‘Really, now, Jane, I can’t remember – if I ever
heard, that is. An Adoption Society, maybe? Or some
unwanted child that Gulbrandsen had heard about.
Why? Do you think it’s important?’
‘Well, one always likes to know the background, so
to speak. But please go on.’
‘The next thing that happened was that Carrie
Louise found that she was going to have a baby
after all. I understand from doctors that that quite
often happens.’
Miss Marple nodded.
‘I believe so.’
‘Anyway, it did happen, and in a funny kind of
way, Carrie Louise was almost disconcerted, if you
can understand what I mean. Earlier, of course, she’d
have been wild with joy. As it was, she’d given such
a devoted love to Pippa that she felt quite apologetic
to Pippa for putting her nose out of joint, so to speak.
And then Mildred, when she arrived, was really a very
unattractive child. Took after the Gulbrandsens – who
were solid and worthy – but deﬁnitely homely. Carrie
Louise was always so anxious to make no difference
between the adopted child and her own child that I
think she rather tended to overindulge Pippa and pass
over Mildred. Sometimes I think that Mildred resented
it. However I didn’t see them often. Pippa grew up a
very beautiful girl and Mildred grew up a plain one.
24

They do it with Mirrors

Eric Gulbrandsen died when Mildred was ﬁfteen and
Pippa eighteen. At twenty Pippa married an Italian,
the Marchese di San Severiano – oh, quite a genuine
Marchese – not an adventurer, or anything like that.
She was by way of being an heiress (naturally, or San
Severiano wouldn’t have married her – you know what
Italians are!). Gulbrandsen left an equal sum in trust
for both his own and his adopted daughter. Mildred
married a Canon Strete – a nice man but given to colds
in the head. About ten or ﬁfteen years older than she
was. Quite a happy marriage, I believe.
‘He died a year ago and Mildred has come back to
Stonygates to live with her mother. But that’s getting
on too fast, I’ve skipped a marriage or two. I’ll go back
to them. Pippa married her Italian. Carrie Louise was
quite pleased about the marriage. Guido had beautiful
manners and was very handsome, and he was a ﬁne
sportsman. A year later Pippa had a daughter and died
in childbirth. It was a terrible tragedy and Guido San
Severiano was very cut up. Carrie Louise went to and
fro between Italy and England a good deal, and it was
in Rome that she met Johnnie Restarick and married
him. The Marchese married again and he was quite
willing for his little daughter to be brought up in
England by her exceedingly wealthy grandmother. So
they all settled down at Stonygates, Johnnie Restarick
and Carrie Louise, and Johnnie’s two boys, Alexis and
25

p

q

Stephen (Johnnie’s ﬁrst wife was a Russian) and the
baby Gina. Mildred married her Canon soon afterwards. Then came all this business of Johnnie and
the Yugoslavian woman and the divorce. The boys
still came to Stonygates for their holidays and were
devoted to Carrie Louise, and then in 1938, I think
it was, Carrie Louise married Lewis.’
Mrs Van Rydock paused for breath.
‘You’ve not met Lewis?’
Miss Marple shook her head.
‘No, I think I last saw Carrie Louise in 1928. She very
sweetly took me to Covent Garden – to the Opera.’
‘Oh yes. Well, Lewis was a very suitable person for
her to marry. He was the head of a very celebrated ﬁrm
of chartered accountants. I think he met her ﬁrst over
some questions of the ﬁnances of the Gulbrandsen
Trust and the College. He was well off, just about her
own age, and a man of absolutely upright life. But he
was a crank. He was absolutely rabid on the subject of
the redemption of young criminals.’
Ruth Van Rydock sighed.
‘As I said just now, Jane, there are fashions in
philanthropy. In Gulbrandsen’s time it was education.
Before that it was soup kitchens –’
Miss Marple nodded.
‘Yes, indeed. Port wine jelly and calf ’s head broth
taken to the sick. My mother used to do it.’
26

They do it with Mirrors

‘That’s right. Feeding the body gave way to feeding
the mind. Everyone went mad on educating the lower
classes. Well, that’s passed. Soon, I expect, the fashionable thing to do will be not to educate your children,
preserve their illiteracy carefully until they’re eighteen.
Anyway the Gulbrandsen Trust and Education Fund
was in some difﬁculties because the State was taking
over its functions. Then Lewis came along with his
passionate enthusiasm about constructive training for
juvenile delinquents. His attention had been drawn to
the subject ﬁrst in the course of his profession – auditing
accounts where ingenious young men had perpetrated
frauds. He was more and more convinced that juvenile
delinquents were not subnormal – that they had excellent
brains and abilities and only needed right direction.’
‘There is something in that,’ said Miss Marple. ‘But
it is not entirely true. I remember –’
She broke off and glanced at her watch.
‘Oh dear – I mustn’t miss the 6.30.’
Ruth Van Rydock said urgently:
‘And you will go to Stonygates?’
Gathering up her shopping bag and her umbrella
Miss Marple said:
‘If Carrie Louise asks me –’
‘She will ask you. You’ll go? Promise, Jane?’
Jane Marple promised.

27

p

q

■
B
L
A
N
K
P
A
G
E
28
■
28

Chapter 3

I
Miss Marple got out of the train at Market Kindle
station. A kindly fellow passenger handed out her
suitcase after her, and Miss Marple, clutching a string
bag, a faded leather handbag and some miscellaneous
wraps, uttered appreciative twitters of thanks.
‘So kind of you, I’m sure . . . So difﬁcult nowadays
– not many porters. I get so ﬂustered when I travel.’
The twitters were drowned by the booming noise of
the station announcer saying loudly but indistinctly that
the 3.18 was standing at Platform 1, and was about to
proceed to various unidentiﬁable stations.
Market Kindle was a large empty windswept station
with hardly any passengers or railway staff to be seen
on it. Its claim to distinction lay in having six platforms
and a bay where a very small train of one carriage was
pufﬁng importantly.
Miss Marple, rather more shabbily dressed than was
29

p

q

her custom (so lucky that she hadn’t given away the old
speckledy), was peering around her uncertainly when
a young man came up to her.
‘Miss Marple?’ he said. His voice had an unexpectedly
dramatic quality about it, as though the utterance of
her name were the ﬁrst words of a part he was playing
in amateur theatricals. ‘I’ve come to meet you – from
Stonygates.’
Miss Marple looked gratefully at him, a charming
helpless-looking old lady with, if he had chanced to
notice it, very shrewd blue eyes. The personality of
the young man did not quite match his voice. It was
less important, one might almost say insigniﬁcant. His
eyelids had a trick of ﬂuttering nervously.
‘Oh thank you,’ said Miss Marple. ‘There’s just this
suitcase.’
She noticed that the young man did not pick up her
suitcase himself. He ﬂipped a ﬁnger at a porter who
was trundling some packing cases past on a trolley.
‘Bring it out, please,’ he said, and added importantly,
‘for Stonygates.’
The porter said cheerfully:
‘Rightyho. Shan’t be long.’
Miss Marple fancied that her new acquaintance was
not too pleased about this. It was as if Buckingham
Palace had been dismissed as no more important than
3 Laburnum Road.
30

They do it with Mirrors

He said, ‘The railways get more impossible every
day!’
Guiding Miss Marple towards the exit, he said: ‘I’m
Edgar Lawson. Mrs Serrocold asked me to meet you. I
help Mr Serrocold in his work.’
There was again the faint insinuation that a busy and
important man had, very charmingly, put important
affairs on one side out of chivalry to his employer’s
wife.
And again the impression was not wholly convincing
– it had a theatrical ﬂavour.
Miss Marple began to wonder about Edgar Lawson.
They came out of the station and Edgar guided
the old lady to where a rather elderly Ford V. 8 was
standing.
He was just saying ‘Will you come in front with
me, or would you prefer the back?’ when there was
a diversion.
A new gleaming two-seater Rolls Bentley came purring into the station yard and drew up in front of the
Ford. A very beautiful young woman jumped out of it
and came across to them. The fact that she wore dirty
corduroy slacks and a simple shirt open at the neck
seemed somehow to enhance the fact that she was not
only beautiful but expensive.
‘There you are, Edgar. I thought I wouldn’t make it
in time. I see you’ve got Miss Marple. I came to meet
31

p

q

her.’ She smiled dazzlingly at Miss Marple, showing a
row of lovely teeth in a sunburnt southern face. ‘I’m
Gina,’ she said. ‘Carrie Louise’s granddaughter. What
was your journey like? Simply foul? What a nice string
bag. I love string bags. I’ll take it and the coats and then
you can get in better.’
Edgar’s face ﬂushed. He protested.
‘Look here, Gina, I came to meet Miss Marple. It
was all arranged . . .’
Again the teeth ﬂashed in that wide lazy smile.
‘Oh I know, Edgar, but I suddenly thought it would
be nice if I came along. I’ll take her with me and you
can wait and bring her cases up.’
She slammed the door on Miss Marple, ran round
to the other side, jumped in the driving seat, and they
purred swiftly out of the station.
Looking back, Miss Marple noticed Edgar Lawson’s
face.
‘I don’t think, my dear,’ she said, ‘that Mr Lawson
is very pleased.’
Gina laughed.
‘Edgar’s a frightful idiot,’ she said. ‘Always so pompous about things. You’d really think he mattered!’
Miss Marple asked, ‘Doesn’t he matter?’
‘Edgar?’ There was an unconscious note of cruelty
in Gina’s scornful laugh. ‘Oh, he’s bats anyway.’
‘Bats?’
32

They do it with Mirrors

‘They’re all bats at Stonygates,’ said Gina. ‘I don’t
mean Lewis and Grandam and me and the boys – and
not Miss Bellever, of course. But the others. Sometimes
I feel I’m going a bit bats myself living there. Even Aunt
Mildred goes out on walks and mutters to herself all the
time – and you don’t expect a Canon’s widow to do
that, do you?’
They swung out of the station approach and accelerated up the smooth surfaced empty road. Gina shot
a swift sideways glance at her companion.
‘You were at school with Grandam, weren’t you? It
seems so queer.’
Miss Marple knew perfectly what she meant. To
youth it seems very odd to think that age was once
young and pigtailed and struggled with decimals and
English literature.
‘It must,’ said Gina with awe in her voice, and
obviously not meaning to be rude, ‘have been a very
long time ago.’
‘Yes, indeed,’ said Miss Marple. ‘You feel that more
with me than you do with your grandmother, I expect?’
Gina nodded. ‘It’s cute of you saying that. Grandam,
you know, gives one a curiously ageless feeling.’
‘It is a long time since I’ve seen her. I wonder if I
shall ﬁnd her much changed.’
‘Her hair’s grey, of course,’ said Gina vaguely. ‘And
she walks with a stick because of her arthritis. It’s got
33

p

q

much worse lately. I suppose that –’ she broke off, and
then asked: ‘Have you been to Stonygates before?’
‘No, never. I’ve heard a great deal about it, of
course.’
‘It’s pretty ghastly, really,’ said Gina cheerfully. ‘A
sort of Gothic monstrosity. What Steve calls Best Victorian Lavatory period. But it’s fun, too, in a way. Only
of course everything’s madly earnest, and you tumble over psychiatrists everywhere underfoot. Enjoying themselves madly. Rather like Scout-masters, only
worse. The young criminals are rather pets, some of
them. One showed me how to diddle locks with a bit of
wire and one angelic-faced boy gave me a lot of points
about coshing people.’
Miss Marple considered this information thoughtfully.
‘It’s the thugs I like best,’ said Gina. ‘I don’t fancy
the queers so much. Of course Lewis and Dr Maverick
think they’re all queer – I mean they think it’s repressed
desires and disordered home life and their mothers
getting off with soldiers and all that. I don’t really
see it myself because some people have had awful
home lives and yet have managed to turn out quite
all right.’
‘I’m sure it is all a very difﬁcult problem,’ said Miss
Marple.
Gina laughed, again showing her magniﬁcent teeth.
34

They do it with Mirrors

‘It doesn’t worry me much. I suppose some people
have these sort of urges to make the world a better
place. Lewis is quite dippy about it all – he’s going
to Aberdeen next week because there’s a case coming
up in the police court – a boy with ﬁve previous
convictions.’
‘The young man who met me at the station? Mr
Lawson. He helps Mr Serrocold, he told me. Is he his
secretary?’
‘Oh Edgar hasn’t brains enough to be a secretary.
He’s a case, really. He used to stay at hotels and pretend
he was a V.C. or a ﬁghter pilot and borrow money and
then do a ﬂit. I think he’s just a rotter. But Lewis goes
through a routine with them all. Makes them feel one
of the family and gives them jobs to do and all that to
encourage their sense of responsibility. I daresay we
shall be murdered by one of them one of these days.’
Gina laughed merrily.
Miss Marple did not laugh.
They turned in through some imposing gates where
a Commissionaire was standing on duty in a military
manner and drove up a drive ﬂanked with rhododendrons. The drive was badly kept and the grounds
seemed neglected.
Interpreting her companion’s glance, Gina said,
‘No gardeners during the war, and since we haven’t
bothered. But it does look rather terrible.’
35

p

q

!! Map to be inserted !!

36

They do it with Mirrors

They came round a curve and Stonygates appeared
in its full glory. It was, as Gina had said, a vast ediﬁce
of Victorian Gothic – a kind of temple to Plutocracy.
Philanthropy had added to it in various wings and
outbuildings which, while not positively dissimilar in
style, had robbed the structure as a whole of any
cohesion or purpose.
‘Hideous, isn’t it?’ said Gina affectionately. ‘There’s
Grandam on the terrace. I’ll stop here and you can go
and meet her.’
Miss Marple advanced along the terrace towards her
old friend.
From a distance, the slim little ﬁgure looked curiously girlish in spite of the stick on which she leaned
and her slow and obviously rather painful progress. It
was as though a young girl was giving an exaggerated
imitation of old age.
‘Jane,’ said Mrs Serrocold.
‘Dear Carrie Louise.’
Yes, unmistakably Carrie Louise. Strangely unchanged, strangely youthful still, although, unlike her
sister, she used no cosmetics or artiﬁcial aids to youth.
Her hair was grey, but it had always been of a silvery
fairness and the colour had changed very little. Her
skin had still a rose leaf pink and white appearance,
though now it was a crumpled rose leaf. Her eyes had
still their starry innocent glance. She had the slender
37

p

q

youthful ﬁgure of a girl and her head kept its eager
birdlike tilt.
‘I do blame myself,’ said Carrie Louise in her sweet
voice, ‘for letting it be so long. Years since I saw you,
Jane dear. It’s just lovely that you’ve come at last to
pay us a visit here.’
From the end of the terrace Gina called:
‘You ought to come in, Grandam. It’s getting cold
– and Jolly will be furious.’
Carrie Louise gave her little silvery laugh.
‘They all fuss about me so,’ she said. ‘They rub it
in that I’m an old woman.’
‘And you don’t feel like one.’
‘No, I don’t, Jane. In spite of all my aches and pains
and I’ve got plenty. Inside I go on feeling just a chit like
Gina. Perhaps everyone does. The glass shows them
how old they are and they just don’t believe it. It seems
only a few months ago that we were at Florence. Do
you remember Fraulein Schweich and her boots?’
The two elderly women laughed together at events
that had happened nearly half a century ago.
They walked together to a side door. In the doorway
a gaunt elderly lady met them. She had an arrogant nose, a short haircut and wore stout well-cut
tweeds.
She said ﬁercely:
‘It’s absolutely crazy of you, Cara, to stay out so late.
38

They do it with Mirrors

You’re absolutely incapable of taking care of yourself.
What will Mr Serrocold say?’
‘Don’t scold me, Jolly,’ said Carrie Louise pleadingly.
She introduced Miss Bellever to Miss Marple.
‘This is Miss Bellever, who is simply everything to
me. Nurse, dragon, watchdog, secretary, housekeeper
and very faithful friend.’
Juliet Bellever sniffed, and the end of her big nose
turned rather pink, a sign of emotion.
‘I do what I can,’ she said grufﬂy. ‘This is a
crazy household. You simply can’t arrange any kind
of planned routine.’
‘Darling Jolly, of course you can’t. I wonder why you
ever try. Where are you putting Miss Marple?’
‘In the Blue Room. Shall I take her up?’ asked Miss
Bellever.
‘Yes, please do, Jolly. And then bring her down to
tea. It’s in the library today, I think.’
The Blue Room had heavy curtains of a rich faded
blue brocade that must have been, Miss Marple thought,
about ﬁfty years old. The furniture was mahogany,
big and solid, and the bed was a vast mahogany
fourposter. Miss Bellever opened a door into a connecting bathroom. This was unexpectedly modern,
orchid in colouring and with much dazzling chromium.
She observed grimly:
‘John Restarick had ten bathrooms put into the house
39

p

q

when he married Cara. The plumbing is about the only
thing that’s ever been modernized. He wouldn’t hear
of the rest being altered – said the whole place was a
perfect Period Piece. Did you ever know him at all?’
‘No, I never met him. Mrs Serrocold and I have met
very seldom though we have always corresponded.’
‘He was an agreeable fellow,’ said Miss Bellever.
‘No good, of course! A complete rotter. But pleasant
to have about the house. Great charm. Women liked
him far too much. That was his undoing in the end.
Not really Cara’s type.’
She added with a brusque resumption of her practical manner:
‘The housemaid will unpack for you. Do you want
a wash before tea?’
Receiving an afﬁrmative answer, she said that Miss
Marple would ﬁnd her waiting at the top of the stairs.
Miss Marple went into the bathroom and washed
her hands and dried them a little nervously on a
very beautiful orchid-coloured face towel. Then she
removed her hat and patted her soft white hair into
place.
Opening her door, she found Miss Bellever waiting
for her, and was conducted down the big gloomy
staircase and across a vast dark hall and into a room
where bookshelves went up to the ceiling and a big
window looked out over an artiﬁcial lake.
40

They do it with Mirrors

Carrie Louise was standing by the window and Miss
Marple joined her.
‘What a very imposing house this is,’ said Miss
Marple. ‘I feel quite lost in it.’
‘Yes, I know. It’s ridiculous, really. It was built
by a prosperous iron master – or something of that
kind. He went bankrupt not long after. I don’t wonder really. There were about fourteen living-rooms –
all enormous. I’ve never seen what people can want
with more than one sitting-room. And all those huge
bedrooms. Such a lot of unnecessary space. Mine is
terribly overpowering – and quite a long way to walk
from the bed to the dressing table. And great heavy
dark crimson curtains.’
‘You haven’t had it modernized and redecorated?’
Carrie Louise looked vaguely surprised.
‘No. On the whole it’s very much as it was when I
ﬁrst lived here with Eric. It’s been repainted, of course,
but they always do it the same colour. Those things
don’t really matter, do they? I mean I shouldn’t have
felt justiﬁed in spending a lot of money on that kind of
thing when there are so many things that are so much
more important.’
‘Have there been no changes at all in the house?’
‘Oh – yes – heaps of them. We’ve just kept a kind of
block in the middle of the house as it was – the Great
Hall and the rooms off and over. They’re the best ones
41

p

q

and Johnnie – my second husband – was lyrical over
them and said they should never be touched or altered
– and of course he was an artist and a designer and
he knew about these things. But the East and West
wings have been completely remodelled. All the rooms
partitioned off and divided up, so that we have ofﬁces,
and bedrooms for the teaching staff, and all that. The
boys are all in the College building – you can see it
from here.’
Miss Marple looked out towards where large red
brick buildings showed through a belt of sheltered
trees. Then her eyes fell on something nearer at hand,
and she smiled a little.
‘What a very beautiful girl Gina is,’ she said.
Carrie Louise’s face lit up.
‘Yes, isn’t she?’ she said softly. ‘It’s so lovely to
have her back here again. I sent her to America at the
beginning of the war – to Ruth. Did Ruth talk about
her at all?’
‘No. At least she did just mention her.’
Carrie Louise sighed.
‘Poor Ruth! She was frightfully upset over Gina’s
marriage. But I’ve told her again and again that I don’t
blame her in the least. Ruth doesn’t realize, as I do, that
the old barriers and class shibboleths are gone – or at
any rate are going.
‘Gina was doing her war work – and she met this
42

They do it with Mirrors

young man. He was a Marine and had a very good
war record. And a week later they were married. It
was all far too quick, of course, no time to ﬁnd out
if they were really suited to each other – but that’s
the way of things nowadays. Young people belong to
their generation. We may think they’re unwise in many
of their doings, but we have to accept their decisions.
Ruth, though, was terribly upset.’
‘She didn’t consider the young man suitable?’
‘She kept saying that one didn’t know anything about
him. He came from the Middle West and he hadn’t
any money – and naturally no profession. There are
hundreds of boys like that everywhere – but it wasn’t
Ruth’s idea of what was right for Gina. However, the
thing was done. I was so glad when Gina accepted
my invitation to come over here with her husband.
There’s so much going on here – jobs of every kind,
and if Walter wants to specialize in medicine or get
a degree or anything he could do it in this country.
After all, this is Gina’s home. It’s delightful to have
her back, to have someone so warm and gay and alive
in the house.’
Miss Marple nodded and looked out of the window
again at the two young people standing near the lake.
‘They’re a remarkably handsome couple, too,’ she
said. ‘I don’t wonder Gina fell in love with him!’
‘Oh, but that – that isn’t Wally.’ There was, quite
43

p

q

suddenly, a touch of embarrassment, or restraint, in
Mrs Serrocold’s voice. ‘That’s Steve – the younger of
Johnnie Restarick’s two boys. When Johnnie – when he
went away, he’d no place for the boys in the holidays,
so I always had them here. They look on this as their
home. And Steve’s here permanently now. He runs
our dramatic branch. We have a theatre, you know,
and plays – we encourage all the artistic instincts.
Lewis says that so much of this juvenile crime is due
to exhibitionism, most of the boys have had such a
thwarted unhappy home life, and these hold-ups and
burglaries make them feel heroes. We urge them to
write their own plays and act in them and design
and paint their own scenery. Steve is in charge of the
theatre. He’s so keen and enthusiastic. It’s wonderful
what life he’s put into the whole thing.’
‘I see,’ said Miss Marple slowly.
Her long-distance sight was good (as many of her
neighbours knew to their cost in the village of St Mary
Mead) and she saw very clearly the dark handsome face
of Stephen Restarick as he stood facing Gina, talking
eagerly. Gina’s face she could not see, since the girl
had her back to them, but there was no mistaking the
expression in Stephen Restarick’s face.
‘It isn’t any business of mine,’ said Miss Marple, ‘but
I suppose you realize, Carrie Louise, that he’s in love
with her.’
44

They do it with Mirrors

‘Oh no –’ Carrie Louise looked troubled. ‘Oh no, I
do hope not.’
‘You were always up in the clouds, Carrie Louise.
There’s not the least doubt about it.’

45

p

q

■
B
L
A
N
K
P
A
G
E
46
■

Chapter 4

I
Before Mrs Serrocold could say anything, her husband
came in from the hall carrying some open letters in
his hand.
Lewis Serrocold was a short man, not particularly
impressive in appearance, but with a personality that
immediately marked him out. Ruth had once said of
him that he was more like a dynamo than a human
being. He usually concentrated entirely on what was
immediately occupying his attention and paid no attention to the objects or persons who were surrounding them.
‘A bad blow, dearest,’ he said. ‘That boy, Jackie Flint.
Back at his tricks again. And I really did think he meant
to go straight this time if he got a proper chance. He
was most earnest about it. You know we found he’d
always been keen on railways – and both Maverick and
I thought that if he got a job on the railways he’d stick to
47

p

q

it and make good. But it’s the same story. Petty thieving
from the parcels ofﬁce. Not even stuff he could want
or sell. That shows that it must be psychological. We
haven’t really got to the root of the trouble. But I’m
not giving up.’
‘Lewis – this is my old friend, Jane Marple.’
‘Oh how d’you do,’ said Mr Serrocold absently. ‘So
glad – they’ll prosecute, of course. A nice lad, too, not
too many brains, but a really nice boy. Unspeakable
home he came from. I –’
He suddenly broke off, and the dynamo was switched
on to the guest.
‘Why, Miss Marple, I’m so delighted you’ve come
to stay with us for a while. It will make such a great
difference to Caroline to have a friend of old days with
whom she can exchange memories. She has in many
ways a grim time here – so much sadness in the stories
of these poor children. We do hope you’ll stay with us
a very long time.’
Miss Marple felt the magnetism and realized how
attractive it would have been to her friend. That Lewis
Serrocold was a man who would always put causes
before people she did not doubt for a moment. It might
have irritated some women, but not Carrie Louise.
Lewis Serrocold sorted out another letter.
‘At any rate we’ve some good news. This is from the
Wiltshire and Somerset Bank. Young Morris is doing
48

They do it with Mirrors

extremely well. They’re thoroughly satisﬁed with him
and in fact are promoting him next month. I always
knew that all he needed was responsibility – that, and
a thorough grasp of the handling of money and what
it means.’
He turned to Miss Marple.
‘Half these boys don’t know what money is. It represents to them going to the pictures or to the dogs, or
buying cigarettes – and they’re clever with ﬁgures and
ﬁnd it exciting to juggle them round. Well, I believe
in – what shall I say? – rubbing their noses in the stuff
– train them in accountancy, in ﬁgures – show them
the whole inner romance of money, so to speak. Give
them skill and then responsibility – let them handle it
ofﬁcially. Our greatest successes have been that way –
only two out of thirty-eight have let us down. One’s
head cashier in a ﬁrm of druggists – a really responsible
position –’
He broke off to say: ‘Tea’s in, dearest,’ to his wife.
‘I thought we were having it here. I told Jolly.’
‘No, it’s in the Hall. The others are there.’
‘I thought they were all going to be out.’
Carrie Louise linked her arm through Miss Marple’s
and they went into the Great Hall. Tea seemed a
rather incongruous meal in its surroundings. The tea
things were piled haphazard on a tray – white utility cups mixed with the remnants of what had been
49

p

q

Rockingham and Spode tea services. There was a
loaf of bread, two pots of jam, and some cheap and
unwholesome-looking cakes.
A plump middle-aged woman with grey hair sat
behind the tea table and Mrs Serrocold said:
‘This is Mildred, Jane. My daughter Mildred. You
haven’t seen her since she was a tiny girl.’
Mildred Strete was the person most in tune with the
house that Miss Marple had so far seen. She looked
prosperous and digniﬁed. She had married late in her
thirties a Canon of the Church of England and was
now a widow. She looked exactly like a Canon’s widow,
respectable and slightly dull. She was a plain woman
with a large unexpressive face and dull eyes. She had
been, Miss Marple reﬂected, a very plain little girl.
‘And this is Wally Hudd – Gina’s husband.’
Wally was a big young man with hair brushed up on
his head and a sulky expression. He nodded awkwardly
and went on cramming cake into his mouth.
Presently Gina came in with Stephen Restarick.
They were both very animated.
‘Gina’s got a wonderful idea for that backcloth,’ said
Stephen. ‘You know, Gina, you’ve got a very deﬁnite
ﬂair for theatrical designing.’
Gina laughed and looked pleased. Edgar Lawson
came in and sat down by Lewis Serrocold. When Gina
spoke to him, he made a pretence of not answering.
50

They do it with Mirrors

Miss Marple found it all a little bewildering and was
glad to go to her room and lie down after tea.
There were more people still at dinner, a young
Dr Maverick who was either a psychiatrist or a psychologist – Miss Marple was rather hazy about the
difference – and whose conversation, dealing almost
entirely with the jargon of his trade, was practically
unintelligible to her. There were also two spectacled
young men who held posts on the teaching side, and
a Mr Baumgarten, who was an occupational therapist,
and three intensely bashful youths who were doing
their ‘house guest’ week. One of them, a fairhaired
lad with very blue eyes was, Gina informed her in a
whisper, the expert with the ‘cosh’.
The meal was not a particularly appetizing one. It
was indifferently cooked and indifferently served. A
variety of costumes were worn. Miss Bellever wore a
high black dress, Mildred Strete wore evening dress
and a woollen cardigan over it. Carrie Louise had on
a short dress of grey wool – Gina was resplendent in
a kind of peasant get up. Wally had not changed, nor
had Stephen Restarick, Edgar Lawson had on a neat
dark blue suit. Lewis Serrocold wore the conventional
dinner jacket. He ate very little and hardly seemed to
notice what was on his plate.
After dinner Lewis Serrocold and Dr Maverick went
away to the latter’s ofﬁce. The occupational therapist
51

p

q

and the schoolmasters went away to some lair of their
own. The three ‘cases’ went back to the college. Gina
and Stephen went to the theatre to discuss Gina’s idea
for a set. Mildred knitted an indeterminate garment
and Miss Bellever darned socks. Wally sat in a chair
gently tilted backwards and stared into space. Carrie
Louise and Miss Marple talked about old days. The
conversation seemed strangely unreal.
Edgar Lawson alone seemed unable to ﬁnd a niche.
He sat down and then got up restlessly.
‘I wonder if I ought to go to Mr Serrocold,’ he said
rather loudly. ‘He may need me.’
Carrie Louise said gently, ‘Oh I don’t think so. He
was going to talk over one or two points with Dr
Maverick this evening.’
‘Then I certainly won’t butt in! I shouldn’t dream
of going where I wasn’t wanted. I’ve already wasted
time today going down to the station when Mrs Hudd
meant to go herself.’
‘She ought to have told you,’ said Carrie Louise.
‘But I think she just decided at the last moment.’
‘You do realize, Mrs Serrocold, that she made me
look a complete fool! A complete fool!’
‘No, no,’ said Carrie Louise, smiling. ‘You mustn’t
have these ideas.’
‘I know I’m not needed or wanted . . . I’m perfectly
aware of that. If things had been different – if I’d had
52

They do it with Mirrors

my proper place in life it would be very different. Very
different indeed. It’s no fault of mine that I haven’t got
my proper place in life.’
‘Now, Edgar,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘Don’t work yourself up about nothing. Jane thinks it was very kind
of you to meet her. Gina always has these sudden
impulses – she didn’t mean to upset you.’
‘Oh yes, she did. It was done on purpose – to
humiliate me –’
‘Oh Edgar –’
‘You don’t know half of what’s going on, Mrs
Serrocold. Well, I won’t say any more now except
goodnight.’
Edgar went out, shutting the door with a slam behind
him.
Miss Bellever snorted:
‘Atrocious manners.’
‘He’s so sensitive,’ said Carrie Louise vaguely.
Mildred Strete clicked her needles and said sharply:
‘He really is a most odious young man. You shouldn’t
put up with such behaviour, Mother.’
‘Lewis says he can’t help it.’
Mildred said sharply:
‘Everyone can help behaving rudely. Of course I
blame Gina very much. She’s so completely scatterbrained in everything she undertakes. She does nothing
but make trouble. One day she encourages the young
53

q

p

man and the next day she snubs him. What can you
expect?’
Wally Hudd spoke for the ﬁrst time that evening.
He said:
‘That guy’s crackers. That’s all there is to it! Crackers!’

II
In her bedroom that night Miss Marple tried to review
the pattern of Stonygates, but it was as yet too confused. There were currents and cross-currents here –
but whether they could account for Ruth Van Rydock’s
uneasiness it was impossible to tell. It did not seem to
Miss Marple that Carrie Louise was affected in any way
by what was going on round her. Stephen was in love
with Gina. Gina might or might not be in love with
Stephen. Walter Hudd was clearly not enjoying himself. These were incidents that might and did occur in
all places and at most times. There was, unfortunately,
nothing exceptional about them. They ended in the
divorce court and everybody hopefully started again
– when fresh tangles were created. Mildred Strete was
clearly jealous of Gina and disliked her. That, Miss
Marple thought, was very natural.
She thought over what Ruth Van Rydock had told
her. Carrie Louise’s disappointment at not having a
54

They do it with Mirrors

child – the adoption of little Pippa – and then the
discovery that, after all, a child was on the way.
‘Often happens like that,’ Miss Marple’s doctor had
told her. Relief of tension, maybe, and then Nature can
do its work.
He had added that it was usually hard lines on the
adopted child.
But that had not been so in this case. Both Gulbrandsen
and his wife had adored little Pippa. She had made
her place too ﬁrmly in their hearts to be lightly set
aside. Gulbrandsen was already a father. Paternity
meant nothing new to him. Carrie Louise’s maternal
yearnings had been assuaged by Pippa. Her pregnancy
had been uncomfortable and the actual birth difﬁcult
and prolonged. Possibly Carrie Louise, who had never
cared for reality, did not enjoy her ﬁrst brush with it.
There remained two little girls growing up, one
pretty and amusing, the other plain and dull. Which
again, Miss Marple thought, was quite natural. For
when people adopt a baby girl, they choose a pretty
one. And though Mildred might have been lucky and
taken after the Martins who had produced handsome
Ruth and dainty Carrie Louise, Nature elected that she
should take after the Gulbrandsens, who were large and
stolid and uncompromisingly plain.
Moreover, Carrie Louise was determined that the
adopted child should never feel her position, and in
55

p

q

making sure of this she was over-indulgent to Pippa
and sometimes less than fair to Mildred.
Pippa had married and gone away to Italy, and
Mildred for a time had been the only daughter of
the house. But then Pippa had died and Carrie Louise
had brought Pippa’s baby back to Stonygates, and once
more Mildred had been out of it. There had been the
new marriage – the Restarick boys. In 1934 Mildred
had married Canon Strete, a scholarly antiquarian
about ﬁfteen years her senior and had gone away
to live in the South of England. Presumably she had
been happy – but one did not really know. There had
been no children. And now here she was, back again
in the same house where she had been brought up.
And once again, Miss Marple thought, not particularly
happy in it.
Gina, Stephen, Wally, Mildred, Miss Bellever who
liked an ordered routine and was unable to enforce
it. Lewis Serrocold who was clearly blissfully and
whole-heartedly happy; an idealist able to translate
his ideals into practical measures. In none of these
personalities did Miss Marple ﬁnd what Ruth’s words
had led her to believe she might ﬁnd. Carrie Louise
seemed secure, remote at the heart of the whirlpool – as
she had been all her life. What then, in that atmosphere,
had Ruth felt to be wrong . . . ? Did she, Jane Marple,
feel it also?
56

They do it with Mirrors

What of the outer personalities of the whirlpool –
the occupational therapists, the schoolmasters, earnest,
harmless young men, conﬁdent young Dr Maverick,
the three pink-faced innocent-eyed young delinquents
– Edgar Lawson . . .
And here, just before she fell asleep, Miss Marple’s
thoughts stopped and revolved speculatively round the
ﬁgure of Edgar Lawson. Edgar Lawson reminded her
of someone or something. There was something a little
wrong about Edgar Lawson – perhaps more than a
little. Edgar Lawson was maladjusted – that was the
phrase, wasn’t it? But surely that didn’t, and couldn’t
touch Carrie Louise?’
Mentally, Miss Marple shook her head.
What worried her was something more than that.

57

p

q

■
B
L
A
N
K
P
A
G
E
58
■
58

Chapter 5

I
Gently eluding her hostess the next morning, Miss
Marple went out into the gardens. Their condition
distressed her. They had once been an ambitiously set
out achievement. Clumps of rhododendrons, smooth
slopes of lawns, massed borders of herbaceous plants,
clipped boxhedges surrounding a formal rose garden. Now all was largely derelict, the lawns raggedly
mown, the borders full of weeds with tangled ﬂowers struggling through them, the paths moss-covered
and neglected. The kitchen gardens, on the other
hand, enclosed by red brick walls, were prosperous
and well stocked. That, presumably, was because they
had a utility value. So, also, a large portion of what
had once been lawn and ﬂower garden, was now
fenced off and laid out in tennis courts and a bowling green.
Surveying the herbaceous border, Miss Marple
59

p

q

clicked her tongue vexedly and pulled up a ﬂourishing
plant of groundsel.
As she stood with it in her hand, Edgar Lawson
came into view. Seeing Miss Marple, he stopped and
hesitated. Miss Marple had no mind to let him escape.
She called him briskly. When he came, she asked him
if he knew where any gardening tools were kept.
Edgar said vaguely that there was a gardener somewhere who would know.
‘It’s such a pity to see this border so neglected,’
twittered Miss Marple. ‘I’m so fond of gardens.’ And
since it was not her intention that Edgar should go
in search of any necessary implement she went on
quickly:
‘It’s about all an old and useless woman can ﬁnd to
do. Now I don’t suppose you ever bother your head
about gardens, Mr Lawson. You have so much real
and important work to do. Being in a responsible
position here, with Mr Serrocold. You must ﬁnd it
all most interesting.’
He answered quickly, almost eagerly:
‘Yes – yes – it is interesting.’
‘And you must be of the greatest assistance to Mr
Serrocold.’
His face darkened.
‘I don’t know. I can’t be sure. It’s what’s behind it
all –’
60

They do it with Mirrors

He broke off. Miss Marple watched him thoughtfully. A pathetic undersized young man in a neat dark
suit. A young man that few people would look at twice,
or remember if they did look . . .
There was a garden seat nearby and Miss Marple
drifted towards it and sat. Edgar stood frowning in
front of her.
‘I’m sure,’ said Miss Marple brightly, ‘that Mr
Serrocold relies on you a great deal.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Edgar. ‘I really don’t know.’ He
frowned and almost absently sat down beside her. ‘I’m
in a very difﬁcult position.’
‘Of course,’ said Miss Marple.
The young man Edgar sat staring in front of him.
‘This is all highly conﬁdential,’ he said suddenly.
‘Of course,’ said Miss Marple.
‘If I had my rights –’
‘Yes?’
‘I might as well tell you . . . You won’t let it go any
further I’m sure?’
‘Oh no.’ She noticed he did not wait for her disclaimer.
‘My father – actually, my father is a very important man.’
This time there was no need to say anything. She
had only to listen.
‘Nobody knows except Mr Serrocold. You see, it
61

p

q

might prejudice my father’s position if the story got
out.’ He turned to her. He smiled. A sad digniﬁed
smile. ‘You see, I’m Winston Churchill’s son.’
‘Oh,’ said Miss Marple. ‘I see.’
And she did see. She remembered a rather sad story
in St Mary Mead – and the way it had gone.
Edgar Lawson went on, and what he said had the
familiarity of a stage scene.
‘There were reasons. My mother wasn’t free. Her
own husband was in an asylum – there could be no
divorce – no question of marriage. I don’t really blame
them. At least, I think I don’t . . . He’s done, always,
everything he could. Discreetly, of course. And that’s
where the trouble has arisen. He’s got enemies – and
they’re against me, too. They’ve managed to keep us
apart. They watch me. Wherever I go, they spy on me.
And they make things go wrong for me.’
Miss Marple shook her head.
‘Dear, dear,’ she said.
‘In London I was studying to be a doctor. They
tampered with my exams – they altered the answers.
They wanted me to fail. They followed me about the
streets. They told things about me to my landlady.
They hound me wherever I go.’
‘Oh, but you can’t be sure of that,’ said Miss Marple
soothingly.
‘I tell you I know! Oh they’re very cunning. I never
62

They do it with Mirrors

get a glimpse of them or ﬁnd out who they are. But
I shall ﬁnd out . . . Mr Serrocold took me away from
London and brought me down here. He was kind
– very kind. But even here, you know, I’m not safe.
They’re here too. Working against me. Making the
others dislike me. Mr Serrocold says that isn’t true
– but Mr Serrocold doesn’t know. Or else – I wonder –
sometimes I’ve thought –’
He broke off. He got up.
‘This is all conﬁdential,’ he said. ‘You do understand
that, don’t you? But if you notice anyone following me
– spying, I mean – you might let me know who it is!’
He went away, then – neat, pathetic, insigniﬁcant.
Miss Marple watched him and wondered . . .
A voice spoke.
‘Nuts,’ it said. ‘Just nuts.’
Walter Hudd was standing beside her. His hands
were thrust deep in his pockets and he was frowning
as he stared after Edgar’s retreating ﬁgure.
‘What kind of a joint is this, anyway?’ he said.
‘They’re all bughouse, the whole lot of them.’
Miss Marple said nothing and Walter went on:
‘That Edgar guy – what do you make of him? Says
his father’s really Lord Montgomery. Doesn’t seem
likely to me. Not Monty! Not from all I’ve heard
about him.’
‘No,’ said Miss Marple. ‘It doesn’t seem very likely.’
63

p

q

‘He told Gina something quite different – some bunk
about being really the heir to the Russian throne – said
he was some Grand Duke’s son or other. Hell, doesn’t
the chap know who his father really was?’
‘I should imagine not,’ said Miss Marple. ‘That is
probably just the trouble.’
Walter sat down beside her, dropping his body on to
the seat with a slack movement. He repeated his former
statement.
‘They’re all bughouse here.’
‘You don’t like being at Stonygates?’
The young man frowned.
‘I simply don’t get it – that’s all! I don’t get it. Take
this place – the house – the whole set-up. They’re
rich, these people. They don’t need dough – they’ve
got it. And look at the way they live. Cracked antique
china and cheap plain stuff all mixed up. No proper
upper-class servants – just some casual hired help.
Tapestries and drapes and chair-covers all satin and
brocade and stuff – and it’s falling to pieces! Big
silver tea urns and what do you know – all yellow
and tarnished for want of cleaning. Mrs Serrocold
just doesn’t care. Look at that dress she had on last
night. Darned under the arms, nearly worn out – and
yet she could go to a store and order what she liked.
Bond Street or wherever it is. Dough? They’re rolling
in dough.’
64

They do it with Mirrors

He paused and sat, deliberating.
‘I understand being poor. There’s nothing much
wrong with it. If you’re young and strong and ready
to work. I never had much money, but I was all set to
get where I wanted. I was going to open a garage. I’d
got a bit of money put by. I talked to Gina about it.
She listened. She seemed to understand. I didn’t know
much about her. All those girls in uniform, they look
about the same. I mean you can’t tell from looking at
them who’s got dough and who hasn’t. I thought she
was a cut above me, perhaps, education and all that.
But it didn’t seem to matter. We fell for each other.
We got married. I’d got my bit put by and Gina had
some too, she told me. We were going to set up a gas
station back home – Gina was willing. Just a couple
of crazy kids we were – mad about each other. Then
that snooty aunt of Gina’s started making trouble . . .
And Gina wanted to come here to England to see her
grandmother. Well, that seemed fair enough. It was her
home, and I was curious to see England anyway. I’d
heard a lot about it. So we came. Just a visit – that’s
what I thought.’
The frown became a scowl.
‘But it hasn’t turned out like that. We’re caught up
in this crazy business. Why don’t we stay here – make
our home here – that’s what they say? Plenty of jobs for
me. Jobs! I don’t want a job feeding candy to gangster
65

p

q

kids and helping them play at kids’ games . . . what’s the
sense of it all? This place could be swell – really swell.
Don’t people who’ve got money understand their luck?
Don’t they understand that most of the world can’t
have a swell place like this and that they’ve got one?
Isn’t it plain crazy to kick your luck when you’ve got
it? I don’t mind working if I’ve got to. But I’ll work
the way I like and at what I like – and I’ll work to get
somewhere. This place makes me feel I’m tangled up
in a spider’s web. And Gina – I can’t make Gina out.
She’s not the same girl I married over in the States.
I can’t – dang it all – I can’t even talk to her now.
Oh hell!’
Miss Marple said gently:
‘I quite see your point of view.’
Wally shot a swift glance at her.
‘You’re the only one I’ve shot my mouth off to so
far. Most of the time I shut up like a clam. Don’t know
what it is about you – you’re English right enough,
really English – but in the durndest way you remind
me of my Aunt Betsy back home.’
‘Now that’s very nice.’
‘A lot of sense she had,’ Wally continued reﬂectively.
‘Looked as frail as though you could snap her in two,
but actually she was tough – yes, sir, I’ll say she was
tough.’
He got up.
66

They do it with Mirrors

‘Sorry talking to you this way,’ he apologized. For
the ﬁrst time, Miss Marple saw him smile. It was a
very attractive smile, and Wally Hudd was suddenly
transﬁgured from an awkward sulky boy into a handsome and appealing young man. ‘Had to get things off
my chest, I suppose. But too bad picking on you.’
‘Not at all, my dear boy,’ said Miss Marple. ‘I have a
nephew of my own – only, of course, a great deal older
than you are.’
Her mind dwelt for a moment on the sophisticated
modern writer Raymond West. A greater contrast to
Walter Hudd could not have been imagined.
‘You’ve got other company coming,’ said Walter
Hudd. ‘That dame doesn’t like me. So I’ll quit. So
long, ma’am. Thanks for the talk.’
He strode away and Miss Marple watched Mildred
Strete coming across the lawn to join her.

II
‘I see you’ve been victimized by that terrible young
man,’ said Mrs Strete, rather breathlessly, as she sank
down on the seat. ‘What a tragedy that is.’
‘A tragedy?’
‘Gina’s marriage. It all came about from sending her
off to America. I told mother at the time it was most
67

p

q

unwise. After all, this is quite a quiet district. We had
hardly any raids here. I do so dislike the way many
people gave way to panic about their families – and
themselves, too, very often.’
‘It must have been difﬁcult to decide what was right
to do,’ said Miss Marple thoughtfully. ‘Where children
were concerned, I mean. With the prospect of possible
invasion, it might have meant their being brought up
under a German régime – as well as the danger of
bombs.’
‘All nonsense,’ said Mrs Strete. ‘I never had the least
doubt that we should win. But mother has always been
quite unreasonable where Gina is concerned. The child
was always spoilt and indulged in every way. There was
absolutely no need to take her away from Italy in the
ﬁrst place.’
‘Her father raised no objection, I understand?’
‘Oh San Severiano! You know what Italians are.
Nothing matters to them but money. He married
Pippa for her money, of course.’
‘Dear me. I always understood he was very devoted
to her and was quite inconsolable at her death.’
‘He pretended to be, no doubt. Why mother ever
countenanced her marrying a foreigner, I can’t imagine. Just the usual American pleasure in a title, I
suppose.’
Miss Marple said mildly:
68

They do it with Mirrors

‘I always thought that dear Carrie Louise was almost
too unworldly in her attitude to life.’
‘Oh, I know. I’ve no patience with it. Mother’s fads
and whims and idealistic projects. You’ve no idea,
Aunt Jane, of all that it has meant. I can speak with
knowledge, of course. I was brought up in the middle
of it all.’
It was with a very faint shock that Miss Marple heard
herself addressed as Aunt Jane. And yet that had been
the convention of those times. Her Christmas presents
to Carrie Louise’s children were always labelled ‘With
love from Aunt Jane,’ and as ‘Aunt Jane’ they thought
of her, when they thought of her at all. Which was not,
Miss Marple supposed, very often.
She looked thoughtfully at the middle-aged woman
sitting beside her. At the pursed tight mouth, the deep
lines from the nose down, the hands tightly pressed
together.
She said gently:
‘You must have had – a difﬁcult childhood.’
Mildred Strete turned eager grateful eyes to her.
‘Oh I’m so glad that somebody appreciates that.
People don’t really know what children go through.
Pippa, you see, was the pretty one. She was older than
I was, too. It was always she who got all the attention.
Both father and mother encouraged her to push herself
forward – not that she needed any encouragement – to
69

p

q

show off. I was always the quiet one. I was shy – Pippa
didn’t know what shyness was. A child can suffer a great
deal, Aunt Jane.’
‘I know that,’ said Miss Marple.
‘“Mildred’s so stupid” – that’s what Pippa used to
say. But I was younger than she was. Naturally I
couldn’t be expected to keep up with her in lessons.
And it’s very unfair on a child when her sister is always
put in front of her.
‘“What a lovely little girl,” people used to say to
Mamma. They never noticed me. And it was Pippa
that Papa used to joke and play with. Someone ought
to have seen how hard it was on me. All the notice and
attention going to her. I wasn’t old enough to realize
that it’s character that matters.’
Her lips trembled, then hardened again.
‘And it was unfair – really unfair – I was their own
child. Pippa was only adopted. I was the daughter of
the house. She was – nobody.’
‘Probably they were extra indulgent to her on that
account,’ said Miss Marple.
‘They liked her best,’ said Mildred Strete. And
added: ‘A child whose own parents didn’t want her
– or more probably illegitimate.’
She went on:
‘It’s come out in Gina. There’s bad blood there.
Blood will tell. Lewis can have what theories he likes
70

They do it with Mirrors

about environment. Bad blood does tell. Look at Gina.’
‘Gina is a very lovely girl,’ said Miss Marple.
‘Hardly in behaviour,’ said Mrs Strete. ‘Everyone but
mother notices how she is carrying on with Stephen
Restarick. Quite disgusting, I call it. Admittedly she
made a very unfortunate marriage, but marriage is marriage and one should be prepared to abide by it. After
all, she chose to marry that dreadful young man.’
‘Is he so dreadful?’
‘Oh dear Aunt Jane! He really looks to me quite like
a gangster. And so surly and rude. He hardly opens his
mouth. And he always looks so raw and uncouth.’
‘He is unhappy, I think,’ said Miss Marple
mildly.
‘I really don’t know why he should be – apart from
Gina’s behaviour, I mean. Everything has been done
for him here. Lewis has suggested several ways in which
he could try to make himself useful – but he prefers to
skulk about doing nothing.’
She burst out: ‘Oh this whole place is impossible
– quite impossible. Lewis thinks of nothing but these
horrible young criminals. And mother thinks of nothing
but him. Everything Lewis does is right. Look at the
state of the garden – the weeds – the overgrowth.
And the house – nothing properly done. Oh I know a
domestic staff is difﬁcult nowadays, but it can be got.
It’s not as though there were any shortage of money.
71

p

q

It’s just that nobody cares. If it were my house –’ She
stopped.
‘I’m afraid,’ said Miss Marple, ‘that we have all to
face the fact that conditions are different. These large
establishments are a great problem. It must be sad for
you, in a way, to come back here and ﬁnd everything
so different. Do you really prefer living here to – well
– somewhere of your own?’
Mildred Strete ﬂushed.
‘After all, it’s my home,’ she said. ‘It was my father’s
house. Nothing can alter that. I’ve a right to be here if
I choose. And I do choose. If only mother were not so
impossible! She won’t even buy herself proper clothes.
It worries Jolly a lot.’
‘I was going to ask you about Miss Bellever.’
‘Such a comfort having her here. She adores mother.
She’s been with her a long time now – she came in John
Restarick’s time. And was wonderful, I believe, during
the whole sad business. I expect you heard that he
ran away with a dreadful Yugoslavian woman – a most
abandoned creature. She’d had any amount of lovers,
I believe. Mother was very ﬁne and digniﬁed about it
all. Divorced him as quietly as possible. Even went
so far as to have the Restarick boys for their holidays
– quite unnecessary, really, other arrangements could
have been made. It would have been unthinkable, of
course, to have let them go to their father and that
72

They do it with Mirrors

woman. Anyway, mother had them here . . . And Miss
Bellever stood by all through things and was a tower
of strength. I sometimes think she makes mother even
more vague than she need be, by doing all the practical
things herself. But I really don’t know what mother
would do without her.’
She paused and then remarked in a tone of surprise:
‘Here is Lewis. How odd. He seldom comes out in
the garden.’
Mr Serrocold came towards them in the same singleminded way that he did everything. He appeared not to
notice Mildred, because it was only Miss Marple who
was in his mind.
‘I’m so sorry,’ he said. ‘I wanted to take you round our
institution and show you everything. Caroline asked me
to. Unfortunately I have to go off to Liverpool. The case
of that boy and the railway parcels ofﬁce. But Maverick
will take you. He’ll be here in a few minutes. I shan’t be
back until the day after tomorrow. It will be splendid if
we can get them not to prosecute.’
Mildred Strete got up and walked away. Lewis
Serrocold did not notice her go. His earnest eyes
gazed at Miss Marple through thick glasses.
‘You see,’ he said, ‘the Magistrates nearly always
take the wrong view. Sometimes they’re too severe,
but sometimes they’re too lenient. If these boys get a
73

p

q

sentence of a few months it’s no deterrent – they get
a kind of a kick out of it, even. Boast about it to their
girl friends. But a severe sentence often sobers them.
They realize that the game isn’t worth it. Or else it’s
better not to serve a prison sentence at all. Corrective
training – constructional training like we have here –’
Miss Marple interrupted him.
‘Mr Serrocold,’ she said. ‘Are you quite satisﬁed
about young Mr Lawson. Is he – is he quite normal?’
A disturbed expression appeared on Lewis Serrocold’s
face.
‘I do hope he’s not relapsing. What has he been
saying?’
‘He told me that he was Winston Churchill’s son –’
‘Of course – of course. The usual statements. He’s
illegitimate, as you’ve probably guessed, poor lad, and
of very humble beginnings. He was a case recommended to me by a Society in London. He’d assaulted
a man in the street who he said was spying on him.
All very typical – Dr Maverick will tell you. I went
into his case history. Mother was of a poor class but
a respectable family in Plymouth. Father a sailor – she
didn’t even know his name . . . Child brought up in
difﬁcult circumstances. Started romancing about his
father and later about himself. Wore uniform and
decorations he wasn’t entitled to – all quite typical.
But Maverick considers the prognosis hopeful. If we
74

They do it with Mirrors

can give him conﬁdence in himself. I’ve given him
responsibility here, tried to make him appreciate that
it’s not a man’s birth that matters but what he is. I’ve
tried to give him conﬁdence in his own ability. The
improvement was marked. I was very happy about him.
And now you say –’
He shook his head.
‘Mightn’t he be dangerous, Mr Serrocold?’
‘Dangerous? I don’t think he has shown any suicidal
tendencies.’
‘I wasn’t thinking of suicide. He talked to me of
enemies – of persecution. Isn’t that, forgive me – a
dangerous sign?’
‘I don’t really think it has reached such a pitch. But
I’ll speak to Maverick. So far, he has been hopeful –
very hopeful.’
He looked at his watch.
‘I must go. Ah, here is our dear Jolly. She will take
charge of you.’
Miss Bellever, arriving briskly, said, ‘The car is at the
door, Mr Serrocold. Dr Maverick rang through from
the Institute. I said I would bring Miss Marple over.
He will meet us at the gates.’
‘Thank you. I must go. My briefcase?’
‘In the car, Mr Serrocold.’
Lewis Serrocold hurried away. Looking after him,
Miss Bellever said:
75

p

q

‘Some day that man will drop dead in his tracks. It’s
against human nature never to relax or rest. He only
sleeps four hours a night.’
‘He is very devoted to this cause,’ said Miss Marple.
‘Never thinks of anything else,’ said Miss Bellever
grimly. ‘Never dreams of looking after his wife or
considering her in any way. She’s a sweet creature, as
you know, Miss Marple, and she ought to have love
and attention. But nothing’s thought of or considered
here except a lot of whining boys and young men who
want to live easily and dishonestly and don’t care about
the idea of doing a little hard work. What about the
decent boys from decent homes? Why isn’t something
done for them? Honesty just isn’t interesting to cranks
like Mr Serrocold and Dr Maverick and all the bunch
of half-baked sentimentalists we’ve got here. I and my
brothers were brought up the hard way, Miss Marple,
and we weren’t encouraged to whine. Soft, that’s what
the world is nowadays!’
They had crossed the garden and passed through a
palisaded gate and had come to the arched gate which
Eric Gulbrandsen had erected as an entrance to his
College, a sturdily built, hideous, red brick building.
Dr Maverick, looking, Miss Marple decided, distinctly abnormal himself, came out to meet them.
‘Thank you, Miss Bellever,’ he said. ‘Now, Miss –
er – oh yes, Miss Marple – I’m sure you’re going to
76

They do it with Mirrors

be interested in what we’re doing here. In our splendid
approach to this great problem. Mr Serrocold is a man
of great insight – great vision. And we’ve got Sir John
Stillwell behind us – my old chief. He was at the Home
Ofﬁce until he retired and his inﬂuence turned the
scales in getting this started. It’s a medical problem
– that’s what we’ve got to get the legal authorities to
understand. Psychiatry came into its own in the war.
The one positive good that did come out of it – Now
ﬁrst of all I want you to see our initial approach to the
problem. Look up –’
Miss Marple looked up at the words carved over the
large arched doorway:
RECOVER HOPE ALL YE WHO ENTER HERE

‘Isn’t that splendid! Isn’t that just the right note to
strike. You don’t want to scold these lads – or punish
them. That’s what they’re hankering after half the
time, punishment. We want to make them feel what
ﬁne fellows they are.’
‘Like Edgar Lawson?’ said Miss Marple.
‘Interesting case, that. Have you been talking to
him?’
‘He has been talking to me,’ said Miss Marple. She
added apologetically, ‘I wondered if, perhaps, he isn’t
a little mad?’
77

p

q

Dr Maverick laughed cheerfully.
‘We’re all mad, dear lady,’ he said as he ushered her
in through the door. ‘That’s the secret of existence.
We’re all a little mad.’

78

Chapter 6

I
On the whole it was rather an exhausting day.
Enthusiasm in itself can be extremely wearing, Miss
Marple thought. She felt vaguely dissatisﬁed with herself and her own reactions. There was a pattern here
– perhaps several patterns, and yet she herself could
obtain no clear glimpse of it or them. Any vague
disquietude she felt centred round the pathetic but
inconspicuous personality of Edgar Lawson. If she
could only ﬁnd in her memory the right parallel.
Painstakingly she rejected the curious behaviour of
Mr Selkirk’s delivery van – the absent-minded postman
– the gardener who worked on Whit Monday – and
that very curious affair of the summer weight combinations.
Something that she could not quite put her ﬁnger on
was wrong about Edgar Lawson – something that went
beyond the observed and admitted facts. But for the life
79

p

q

of her, Miss Marple did not see how that wrongness,
whatever it was, affected her friend Carrie Louise. In
the confused patterns of life at Stonygates people’s
troubles and desires impinged on each other. But none
of them (again as far as she could see) impinged on
Carrie Louise.
Carrie Louise . . . Suddenly Miss Marple realized
that it was she alone, except for the absent Ruth, who
used that name. To her husband, she was Caroline.
To Miss Bellever, Cara. Stephen Restarick usually
addressed her as Madonna. To Wally she was formally
Mrs Serrocold, and Gina elected to address her as
Grandam – a mixture, she had explained, of Grande
Dame and Grandmamma.
Was there some signiﬁcance, perhaps, in the various
names that were found for Caroline Louise Serrocold?
Was she to all of them a symbol and not quite a real
person?
When on the following morning Carrie Louise, dragging her feet a little as she walked, came and sat down
on the garden seat beside her friend and asked her
what she was thinking about, Miss Marple replied
promptly:
‘You, Carrie Louise.’
‘What about me?’
‘Tell me honestly – is there anything here that
worries you?’
80

They do it with Mirrors

‘Worries me?’ The woman raised wondering clear
blue eyes. ‘But Jane, what should worry me?’
‘Well, most of us have worries.’ Miss Marple’s eyes
twinkled a little. ‘I have. Slugs, you know – and the
difﬁculty of getting linen properly darned – and not
being able to get sugar candy for making my damson
gin. Oh, lots of little things – it seems unnatural that
you shouldn’t have any worries at all.’
‘I suppose I must have really,’ said Mrs Serrocold
vaguely. ‘Lewis works too hard, and Stephen forgets
his meals slaving at the theatre, and Gina is very jumpy
– but I’ve never been able to alter people – I don’t see
how you can. So it wouldn’t be any good worrying,
would it?’
‘Mildred’s not very happy, either, is she?’
‘Oh no,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘Mildred never is happy.
She wasn’t as a child. Quite unlike Pippa, who was
always radiant.’
‘Perhaps,’ suggested Miss Marple, ‘Mildred had
cause not to be happy?’
Carrie Louise said quietly:
‘Because of being jealous? Yes, I daresay. But people
don’t really need a cause for feeling what they do
feel. They’re just made that way. Don’t you think
so, Jane?’
Miss Marple thought brieﬂy of Miss Moncrieff,
a slave to a tyrannical invalid mother. Poor Miss
81

p

q

Moncrieff who longed for travel and to see the world.
And of how St Mary Mead in a decorous way had
rejoiced when Mrs Moncrieff was laid in the churchyard and Miss Moncrieff, with a nice little income, was
free at last. And of how Miss Moncrieff, starting on her
travels, had got no farther than Hyères where, calling
to see one of ‘mother’s oldest friends’, she had been so
moved by the plight of an elderly hypochondriac that
she had cancelled her travel reservations and taken up
her abode in the villa to be bullied, over-worked, and
to long wistfully, once more, for the joys of a wider
horizon.
Miss Marple said:
‘I expect you’re right, Carrie Louise.’
‘Of course my being so free from cares is partly due
to Jolly. Dear Jolly. She came to me when Johnnie
and I were just married and was wonderful from the
ﬁrst. She takes care of me as though I were a baby
and quite helpless. She’d do anything for me. I feel
quite ashamed sometimes. I really believe Jolly would
murder someone for me, Jane. Isn’t that an awful thing
to say?’
‘She’s certainly very devoted,’ agreed Miss Marple.
‘She gets so indignant.’ Mrs Serrocold’s silvery laugh
rang out. ‘She’d like me to be always ordering wonderful clothes, and surrounding myself with luxuries,
and she thinks everybody ought to put me ﬁrst and to
82

They do it with Mirrors

dance attendance on me. She’s the one person who’s
absolutely unimpressed by Lewis’s enthusiasm. All our
poor boys are in her view pampered young criminals
and not worth taking trouble over. She thinks this place
is damp and bad for my rheumatism, and that I ought
to go to Egypt or somewhere warm and dry.’
‘Do you suffer much from rheumatism?’
‘It’s got much worse lately. I ﬁnd it difﬁcult to walk.
Horrid cramps in my legs. Oh well –’ again there came
that bewitching elﬁn smile, ‘age must tell.’
Miss Bellever came out of the French windows and
hurried across to them.
‘A telegram, Cara, just come over the telephone.
Arriving this afternoon, Christian Gulbrandsen.’
‘Christian?’ Carrie Louise looked very surprised. ‘I’d
no idea he was in England.’
‘The oak suite, I suppose?’
‘Yes, please, Jolly. Then there will be no stairs.’
Miss Bellever nodded and turned back to the house.
‘Christian Gulbrandsen is my stepson,’ said Carrie
Louise. ‘Eric’s eldest son. Actually he’s two years older
than I am. He’s one of the trustees of the Institute –
the principal trustee. How very annoying that Lewis is
away. Christian hardly ever stays longer than one night.
He’s an immensely busy man. And there are sure to be
so many things they would want to discuss.’
Christian Gulbrandsen arrived that afternoon in time
83

p

q

for tea. He was a big heavy-featured man, with a slow
methodical way of talking. He greeted Carrie Louise
with every sign of affection.
‘And how is our little Carrie Louise? You do not look
a day older. Not a day.’
His hands on her shoulders – he stood smiling down
at her. A hand tugged his sleeve.
‘Christian!’
‘Ah,’ he turned – ‘it is Mildred? How are you,
Mildred?’
‘I’ve not really been at all well lately.’
‘That is bad. That is bad.’
There was a strong resemblance between Christian
Gulbrandsen and his half-sister Mildred. There was
nearly thirty years’ difference in age and they might
easily have been taken for father and daughter. Mildred
herself seemed particularly pleased by his arrival. She
was ﬂushed and talkative, and had talked repeatedly
during the day of ‘my brother,’ ‘my brother Christian,’
‘my brother Mr Gulbrandsen.’
‘And how is little Gina?’ said Gulbrandsen, turning
to that young woman. ‘You and your husband are still
here, then?’
‘Yes. We’ve quite settled down, haven’t we,
Wally?’
‘Looks like it,’ said Wally.
Gulbrandsen’s small shrewd eyes seemed to sum
84

They do it with Mirrors

up Wally quickly. Wally, as usual, looked sullen and
unfriendly.
‘So here I am with all the family again,’ said
Gulbrandsen.
His voice displayed a rather determined geniality
– but in actual fact, Miss Marple thought, he was
not feeling particularly genial. There was a grim
set to his lips and a certain preoccupation in his
manner.
Introduced to Miss Marple, he swept a keen look
over her as though measuring and appraising this
newcomer.
‘We’d no idea you were in England, Christian,’ said
Mrs Serrocold.
‘No, I came over rather unexpectedly.’
‘It is too bad that Lewis is away. How long can
you stay?’
‘I meant to go tomorrow. When will Lewis be back?’
‘Tomorrow afternoon or evening.’
‘It seems then that I must stay another night.’
‘If you’d only let us know –’
‘My dear Carrie Louise, my arrangements, they were
made very suddenly.’
‘You will stay to see Lewis?’
‘Yes, it is necessary that I see Lewis.’
Miss Bellever said to Miss Marple: ‘Mr Gulbrandsen
and Mr Serrocold are both trustees of the Gulbrandsen
85

p

q

Institute. The others are the Bishop of Cromer and Mr
Gilfoy.’
Presumably, then, it was on business concerned with
the Gulbrandsen Institute that Christian Gulbrandsen
had come to Stonygates. It seemed to be assumed so by
Miss Bellever and everyone else. And yet Miss Marple
wondered.
Once or twice the old man cast a thoughtful puzzled
look at Carrie Louise when she was not aware of it –
a look that puzzled Carrie Louise’s watching friend.
From Carrie Louise he shifted his gaze to the others,
examining them one and all with a kind of covert
appraisal that seemed distinctly odd.
After tea, Miss Marple withdrew tactfully from the
others to the library, but rather to her surprise when
she had settled herself with her knitting, Christian
Gulbrandsen came in and sat down beside her.
‘You are a very old friend, I think, of our dear Carrie
Louise?’ he said.
‘We were at school together in Italy, Mr Gulbrandsen.
Many many years ago.’
‘Ah yes. And you are fond of her?’
‘Yes, indeed,’ said Miss Marple warmly.
‘So, I think, is everyone. Yes, I truly think that. It
should be so. For she is a very dear and enchanting
person. Always, since my father married her, I and my
brothers have loved her very much. She has been to
86

They do it with Mirrors

us like a very dear sister. She was a faithful wife to my
father and loyal to all his ideas. She has never thought
of herself, but put the welfare of others ﬁrst.’
‘She has always been an idealist,’ said Miss Marple.
‘An idealist? Yes. Yes, that is so. And therefore it
may be that she does not truly appreciate the evil that
there is in the world.’
Miss Marple looked at him, surprised. His face was
very stern.
‘Tell me,’ he said. ‘How is her health?’
Again Miss Marple felt surprised.
‘She seems to me very well – apart from arthritis –
or rheumatism.’
‘Rheumatism? Yes. And her heart? Her heart is
good?’
‘As far as I know.’ Miss Marple was still more
surprised. ‘But until yesterday I had not seen her
for many years. If you want to know the state of her
health, you should ask somebody in the house here.
Miss Bellever, for instance.’
‘Miss Bellever – Yes, Miss Bellever. Or Mildred?’
‘Or, as you say, Mildred.’
Miss Marple was faintly embarrassed.
Christian Gulbrandsen was staring at her very hard.
‘There is not between the mother and daughter a
very great sympathy, would you say?’
‘No, I don’t think there is.’
87

p

q

‘I agree. It is a pity – her only child, but there it is.
Now this Miss Bellever, you think, is really attached
to her?’
‘Very much so.’
‘And Carrie Louise leans on this Miss Bellever?’
‘I think so.’
Christian Gulbrandsen was frowning. He spoke as
though more to himself than to Miss Marple.
‘There is the little Gina – but she is so young. It is
difﬁcult –’ He broke off. ‘Sometimes,’ he said simply,
‘it is hard to know what is best to be done. I wish very
much to act for the best. I am particularly anxious that
no harm and no unhappiness should come to that dear
lady. But it is not easy – not easy at all.’
Mrs Strete came into the room at that moment.
‘Oh, there you are, Christian. We were wondering
where you were. Dr Maverick wants to know if you
would like to go over anything with him.’
‘That is the new young doctor here? No – no, I will
wait until Lewis returns.’
‘He’s waiting in Lewis’s study. Shall I tell him –’
‘I will have a word with him myself.’
Gulbrandsen hurried out. Mildred Strete stared after
him and then stared at Miss Marple.
‘I wonder if anything is wrong. Christian is very
unlike himself . . . Did he say anything –’
‘He only asked me about your mother’s health.’
88

They do it with Mirrors

‘Her health? Why should he ask you about that?’
Mildred spoke sharply, her large square face ﬂushing
unbecomingly.
‘I really don’t know.’
‘Mother’s health is perfectly good. Surprisingly so
for a woman of her age. Much better than mine as far
as that goes.’ She paused a moment before saying: ‘I
hope you told him so?’
‘I don’t really know anything about it,’ said Miss
Marple. ‘He asked me about her heart.’
‘Her heart?’
‘Yes.’
‘There’s nothing wrong with mother’s heart. Nothing
at all!’
‘I’m delighted to hear you say so, my dear.’
‘What on earth put all these queer ideas into Christian’s head?’
‘I’ve no idea,’ said Miss Marple.

89

p

q

■
B
L
A
N
K
P
A
G
E
90
■
90

Chapter 7

I
The next day passed uneventfully to all appearances,
yet to Miss Marple it seemed that there were signs
of an inner tension. Christian Gulbrandsen spent his
morning with Dr Maverick in going round the Institute
and in discussing the general results of the Institute’s
policy. In the early afternoon Gina took him for a
drive, and after that Miss Marple noticed that he
induced Miss Bellever to show him something in the
gardens. It seemed to her that it was a pretext for
ensuring a tête-à-tête with that grim woman. And yet,
if Christian Gulbrandsen’s unexpected visit had only
to do with business matters, why this wish for Miss
Bellever’s company, since the latter dealt only with the
domestic side of Stonygates?
But in all this, Miss Marple could tell herself that she
was being fanciful. The one really disturbing incident
of the day happened about four o’clock. She had rolled
91

p

q

up her knitting and had gone out in the garden to
take a little stroll before tea. Rounding a straggling
rhododendron she came upon Edgar Lawson, who was
striding along muttering to himself and who nearly ran
into her.
He said, ‘I beg your pardon,’ hastily, but Miss
Marple was startled by the queer staring expression
of his eyes.
‘Aren’t you feeling well, Mr Lawson?’
‘Well? How should I be feeling well? I’ve had a shock
– a terrible shock.’
‘What kind of a shock?’
The young man gave a swift glance past her, and
then a sharp uneasy glance to either side. His doing
so gave Miss Marple a nervous feeling.
‘Shall I tell you?’ He looked at her doubtfully. ‘I don’t
know. I don’t really know. I’ve been so spied upon.’
Miss Marple made up her mind. She took him ﬁrmly
by the arm.
‘If we walk down this path . . . There, now, there
are no trees or bushes near. Nobody can overhear.’
‘No – no, you’re right.’ He drew a deep breath, bent
his head and almost whispered his next words. ‘I’ve
made a discovery. A terrible discovery.’
Edgar Lawson began to shake all over. He was almost
weeping.
‘To have trusted someone! To have believed . . .
92

They do it with Mirrors

and it was lies – all lies. Lies to keep me from ﬁnding out the truth. I can’t bear it. It’s too wicked.
You see, he was the one person I trusted, and now
to ﬁnd out that all the time he’s been at the bottom of it all. It’s he who’s been my enemy! It’s he
who has been having me followed about and spied
upon. But he can’t get away with it any more. I
shall speak out. I shall tell him I know what he has
been doing.’
‘Who is “he”?’ demanded Miss Marple.
Edgar Lawson drew himself up to his full height. He
might have looked pathetic and digniﬁed. But actually
he only looked ridiculous.
‘I’m speaking of my father.’
‘Viscount Montgomery – or do you mean Winston
Churchill?’
Edgar threw her a glance of scorn.
‘They let me think that – just to keep me from
guessing the truth. But I know now. I’ve got a friend
– a real friend. A friend who tells me the truth and
lets me know just how I’ve been deceived. Well, my
father will have to reckon with me. I’ll throw his lies
in his face! I’ll challenge him with the truth. We’ll see
what he’s got to say to that.’
And suddenly breaking away, Edgar went off at a
run and disappeared in the park.
Her face grave, Miss Marple went back to the house.
93

q

p

‘We’re all a little mad, dear lady,’ Dr Maverick
had said.
But it seemed to her that in Edgar’s case it went
rather further than that.

II
Lewis Serrocold arrived back at six-thirty. He stopped
the car at the gates and walked to the house through
the park. Looking out of her window, Miss Marple saw
Christian Gulbrandsen go out to meet him and the two
men, having greeted one another, turned and paced to
and fro up and down the terrace.
Miss Marple had been careful to bring her bird
glasses with her. At this moment she brought them
into action. Was there, or was there not, a ﬂight of
siskins by that far clump of trees?
She noted as the glasses swept down before rising
that both men were looking seriously disturbed. Miss
Marple leant out a little farther. Scraps of conversation
ﬂoated up to her now and then. If either of the men
should look up, it would be quite clear that an enraptured bird watcher had her attention ﬁxed on a point
far removed from their conversation.
‘. . . how to spare Carrie Louise the knowledge –’
Gulbrandsen was saying.
94

They do it with Mirrors

The next time they passed below, Lewis Serrocold
was speaking.
‘. . . if it can be kept from her. I agree that it is she
who must be considered . . .’
Other faint snatches came to the listener.
‘– Really serious –’ ‘– not justiﬁed –’ ‘– too big a
responsibility to take –’ ‘– we should, perhaps, take
outside advice –’
Finally Miss Marple heard Christian Gulbrandsen
say:
‘Ach, it grows cold. We must go inside.’
Miss Marple drew her head in through the window
with a puzzled expression. What she had heard was
too fragmentary to be easily pieced together – but it
served to conﬁrm that vague apprehension that had
been gradually growing upon her and about which
Ruth Van Rydock had been so positive.
Whatever was wrong at Stonygates, it deﬁnitely
affected Carrie Louise.

III
Dinner that evening was a somewhat constrained meal.
Both Gulbrandsen and Lewis were absent-minded and
absorbed in their own thoughts. Walter Hudd glowered
even more than usual, and for once Gina and Stephen
95

p

q

seemed to have little to say either to each other or to the
company at large. Conversation was mostly sustained
by Dr Maverick, who had a lengthy technical discussion with Mr Baumgarten, one of the Occupational
Therapists.
When they moved into the hall after dinner, Christian
Gulbrandsen excused himself almost at once. He said
he had an important letter to write.
‘So if you will forgive me, dear Carrie Louise, I will
go now to my room.’
‘You have all you want there? Jolly?’
‘Yes, yes. Everything. A typewriter, I asked, and one
has been put there. Miss Bellever has been most kind
and attentive.’
He left the Great Hall by the door on the left which
led past the foot of the main staircase and along a
corridor, at the end of which was a suite of bedroom
and bathroom.
When he had gone out Carrie Louise said:
‘Not going down to the theatre tonight, Gina?’
The girl shook her head. She went over and sat by the
window overlooking the front drive and the court.
Stephen glanced at her, then strolled over to the big
grand piano. He sat down at it and strummed very
softly – a queer melancholy little tune. The two Occupational Therapists, Mr Baumgarten and Mr Lacy, and
Dr Maverick, said goodnight and left. Walter turned on
96

They do it with Mirrors

the switch of a reading lamp and with a crackling noise
half the lights in the hall went out.
He growled.
‘That darned switch is always faulty. I’ll go and put
a new fuse in.’
He left the Hall and Carrie Louise murmured,
‘Wally’s so clever with electrical gadgets and things
like that. You remember how he ﬁxed that toaster?’
‘It seems to be all he does do here,’ said Mildred
Strete. ‘Mother, have you taken your tonic?’
Miss Bellever looked annoyed.
‘I declare I completely forgot tonight.’ She jumped
up and went into the dining-room, returning presently
with a small glass containing a little rose-coloured ﬂuid.
Smiling a little, Carrie Louise held out an obedient
hand.
‘Such horrid stuff and nobody lets me forget it,’ she
said, making a wry face.
And then, rather unexpectedly, Lewis Serrocold said:
‘I don’t think I should take it tonight, my dear. I’m not
sure it really agrees with you.’
Quietly, but with that controlled energy always so
apparent in him, he took the glass from Miss Bellever
and put it down on the big oak Welsh dresser.
Miss Bellever said sharply:
‘Really, Mr Serrocold, I can’t agree with you there.
Mrs Serrocold has been very much better since –’
97

p

q

She broke off and turned sharply.
The front door was pushed violently open and
allowed to swing to with a crash. Edgar Lawson came
into the big dim Hall with the air of a star performer
making a triumphal entry.
He stood in the middle of the ﬂoor and struck an
attitude.
It was almost ridiculous – but not quite ridiculous.
Edgar said theatrically:
‘So I have found you, O mine enemy!’
He said it to Lewis Serrocold.
Mr Serrocold looked mildly astonished.
‘Why, Edgar, what is the matter?’
‘You can say that to me – you!’ You know what’s
the matter. You’ve been deceiving me, spying on me,
working with my enemies against me.’
Lewis took him by the arm.
‘Now, now, my dear lad, don’t excite yourself. Tell
me all about it quietly. Come into my ofﬁce.’
He led him across the Hall and through a door on
the right, closing it behind him. After he had done so,
there was another sound, the sharp sound of a key being
turned in the lock.
Miss Bellever looked at Miss Marple, the same idea
in both their minds. It was not Lewis Serrocold who had
turned the key.
Miss Bellever said sharply: ‘That young man is
98

They do it with Mirrors

just about to go off his head in my opinion. It isn’t
safe.’
Mildred said: ‘He’s a most unbalanced young man
– and absolutely ungrateful for everything that’s been
done for him – you ought to put your foot down,
Mother.’
With a faint sigh Carrie Louise murmured:
‘There’s no harm in him really. He’s fond of Lewis.
He’s very fond of him.’
Miss Marple looked at her curiously. There had been
no fondness in the expression that Edgar had turned
on Lewis Serrocold a few moments previously, very
far from it. She wondered, as she wondered before, if
Carrie Louise deliberately turned her back on reality.
Gina said sharply:
‘He had something in his pocket. Edgar, I mean.
Playing with it.’
Stephen murmured as he took his hands from the
keys:
‘In a ﬁlm it would certainly have been a
revolver.’
Miss Marple coughed.
‘I think you know,’ she said apologetically, ‘it was a
revolver.’
From behind the closed door of Lewis’s ofﬁce the
sound of voices had been plainly discernible. Now,
suddenly, they became clearly audible. Edgar Lawson
99

p

q

shouted whilst Lewis Serrocold’s voice kept its even
reasonable note.
‘Lies – lies – lies, all lies. You’re my father. I’m
your son. You’ve deprived me of my rights. I ought
to own this place. You hate me – you want to get rid
of me!’
There was a soothing murmur from Lewis and then
the hysterical voice rose still higher. It screamed out
foul epithets. Edgar seemed rapidly losing control of
himself. Occasional words came from Lewis – ‘calm –
just be calm – you know none of this is true –’ But they
seemed not to soothe, but on the contrary to enrage the
young man still further.
Insensibly everyone in the hall was silent, listening
intently to what went on behind the locked door of
Lewis’s study.
‘I’ll make you listen to me,’ yelled Edgar. ‘I’ll take
that supercilious expression off your face. I’ll have
revenge, I tell you. Revenge for all you’ve made me
suffer.’
The other voice came curtly, unlike Lewis’s usual
unemotional tones.
‘Put that revolver down!’
Gina cried sharply:
‘Edgar will kill him. He’s crazy. Can’t we get the
police or something?’
Carrie Louise, still unmoved, said softly:
100

They do it with Mirrors

‘There’s no need to worry, Gina. Edgar loves Lewis.
He’s just dramatizing himself, that’s all.’
Edgar’s voice sounded through the door in a laugh
that Miss Marple had to admit sounded deﬁnitely
insane.
‘Yes, I’ve got a revolver – and it’s loaded. No, don’t
speak, don’t move. You’re going to hear me out. It’s
you who started this conspiracy against me and now
you’re going to pay for it.’
What sounded like the report of a ﬁrearm made them
all start, but Carrie Louise said:
‘It’s all right, it’s outside – in the park somewhere.’
Behind the locked door, Edgar was raving in a high
screaming voice.
‘You sit there looking at me – looking at me –
pretending to be unmoved. Why don’t you get down
on your knees and beg for mercy? I’m going to shoot,
I tell you. I’m going to shoot you dead! I’m your son –
your unacknowledged despised son – you wanted me
hidden away, out of the world altogether, perhaps. You
set your spies to follow me – to hound me down – you
plotted against me. You, my father! My father. I’m only
a bastard, aren’t I? Only a bastard. You went on ﬁlling
me up with lies. Pretending to be kind to me, and all
the time – all the time – You’re not ﬁt to live. I won’t
let you live.’
Again there came a stream of obscene profanity.
101

p

q

Somewhere during the scene Miss Marple was conscious of Miss Bellever saying:
‘We must do something,’ and leaving the Hall.
Edgar seemed to pause for breath and then he
shouted out:
‘You’re going to die – to die. You’re going to die
now. Take that, you devil, and that!’
Two sharp cracks rang out – not in the park this
time, but deﬁnitely behind the locked door.
Somebody, Miss Marple thought it was Mildred,
cried out:
‘Oh God, what shall we do?’
There was a thud from inside the room and then a
sound, almost more terrible than what had gone before,
the sound of slow heavy sobbing.
Somebody strode past Miss Marple and started shaking and rattling the door.
It was Stephen Restarick.
‘Open the door. Open the door,’ he shouted.
Miss Bellever came back into the Hall. In her hand
she held an assortment of keys.
‘Try some of these,’ she said breathlessly.
At that moment the fused lights came on again. The
Hall sprang into life again after its eerie dimness.
Stephen Restarick began trying the keys.
They heard the inside key fall out as he did so.
Inside that wild desperate sobbing went on.
102

They do it with Mirrors

Walter Hudd, coming lazily back into the Hall,
stopped dead and demanded:
‘Say, what’s going on round here?’
Mildred said tearfully:
‘That awful crazy young man has shot Mr Serrocold.’
‘Please.’ It was Carrie Louise who spoke. She got
up and came across to the study door. Very gently
she pushed Stephen Restarick aside. ‘Let me speak
to him.’
She called – very softly – ‘Edgar . . . Edgar . . . let
me in, will you? Please, Edgar.’
They heard the key ﬁtted into the lock. It turned and
the door was slowly opened.
But it was not Edgar who opened it. It was Lewis
Serrocold. He was breathing hard as though he had
been running, but otherwise he was unmoved.
‘It’s all right, dearest,’ he said. ‘Dearest, it’s quite
all right.’
‘We thought you’d been shot,’ said Miss Bellever
grufﬂy.
Lewis Serrocold frowned. He said with a triﬂe of
asperity:
‘Of course I haven’t been shot.’
They could see into the study by now. Edgar Lawson
had collapsed by the desk. He was sobbing and gasping.
The revolver lay on the ﬂoor where it had dropped
from his hand.
103

p

q

‘But we heard the shots,’ said Mildred.
‘Oh yes, he ﬁred twice.’
‘And he missed you?’
‘Of course he missed me,’ snapped Lewis.
Miss Marple did not consider that there was any of
course about it. The shots must have been ﬁred at fairly
close range.
Lewis Serrocold said irritably:
‘Where’s Maverick? It’s Maverick we need.’
Miss Bellever said:
‘I’ll get him. Shall I ring up the police as well?’
‘Police? Certainly not.’
‘Of course we must ring up the police,’ said Mildred.
‘He’s dangerous.’
‘Nonsense,’ said Lewis Serrocold. ‘Poor lad. Does
he look dangerous?’
At the moment he did not look dangerous. He looked
young and pathetic and rather repulsive.
His voice had lost its carefully acquired accent.
‘I didn’t mean to do it,’ he groaned. ‘I dunno what
came over me – talking all that stuff – I must have
been mad.’
Mildred sniffed.
‘I really must have been mad. I didn’t mean to.
Please, Mr Serrocold, I really didn’t mean to.’
Lewis Serrocold patted him on the shoulder.
‘That’s all right, my boy. No damage done.’
104

They do it with Mirrors

‘I might have killed you, Mr Serrocold.’
Walter Hudd walked across the room and peered at
the wall behind the desk.
‘The bullets went in here,’ he said. His eye dropped
to the desk and the chair behind it. ‘Must have been a
near miss,’ he said grimly.
‘I lost my head. I didn’t rightly know what I was
doing. I thought he’d done me out of my rights. I
thought –’
Miss Marple put in the question she had been
wanting to ask for some time.
‘Who told you,’ she asked, ‘that Mr Serrocold was
your father?’
Just for a second a sly expression peeped out of
Edgar’s distracted face. It was there and gone in a ﬂash.
‘Nobody,’ he said. ‘I just got it into my head.’
Walter Hudd was staring down at the revolver where
it lay on the ﬂoor.
‘Where the hell did you get that gun?’ he demanded.
‘Gun?’ Edgar stared down at it.
‘Looks mighty like my gun,’ said Walter. He stooped
down and picked it up. ‘By heck, it is! You took it out
of my room, you creeping louse, you.’
Lewis Serrocold interposed between the cringing
Edgar and the menacing American.
‘All this can be gone into later,’ he said. ‘Ah, here’s
Maverick. Take a look at him, will you, Maverick?’
105

p

q

Dr Maverick advanced upon Edgar with a kind of
professional zest.
‘This won’t do, Edgar,’ he said. ‘This won’t do,
you know.’
‘He’s a dangerous lunatic,’ said Mildred sharply.
‘He’s been shooting off a revolver and raving. He only
just missed my stepfather.’
Edgar gave a little yelp and Dr Maverick said reprovingly:
‘Careful, please, Mrs Strete.’
‘I’m sick of all this. Sick of the way you all go on
here! I tell you this man’s a lunatic.’
With a bound Edgar wrenched himself away from
Dr Maverick and fell to the ﬂoor at Serrocold’s feet.
‘Help me. Help me. Don’t let them take me away
and shut me up. Don’t let them . . .’
An unpleasing scene, Miss Marple thought.
Mildred said angrily, ‘I tell you he’s –’
Her mother said soothingly:
‘Please Mildred. Not now. He’s suffering.’
Walter muttered:
‘Suffering cripes. They’re all cuckoo round here.’
‘I’ll take charge of him,’ said Dr Maverick. ‘You
come with me, Edgar. Bed and a sedative – and we’ll
talk everything out in the morning. Now you trust me,
don’t you?’
Rising to his feet and trembling a little, Edgar looked
106

They do it with Mirrors

doubtfully at the young doctor and then at Mildred
Strete.
‘She said – I was a lunatic.’
‘No, no, you’re not a lunatic.’
Miss Bellever’s footsteps rang purposefully across
the Hall. She came in with her lips pursed together
and a ﬂushed face.
‘I’ve telephoned the police,’ she said grimly. ‘They
will be here in a few minutes.’
Carrie Louise cried, ‘Jolly!’ in tones of dismay.
Edgar uttered a wail.
Lewis Serrocold frowned angrily.
‘I told you, Jolly, I did not want the police summoned.
This is a medical matter.’
‘That’s as may be,’ said Miss Bellever. ‘I’ve my own
opinion. But I had to call the police. Mr Gulbrandsen’s
been shot dead.’

107

p

q

■
B
L
A
N
K
P
A
G
E
108
■
108

Chapter 8

I
It was a moment or two before anyone took in what
she was saying.
Carrie Louise said incredulously:
‘Christian shot? Dead? Oh, surely, that’s impossible.’
‘If you don’t believe me,’ said Miss Bellever, pursing
her lips, and addressing not so much Carrie Louise, as
the assembled company, ‘go and look for yourselves.’
She was angry. And her anger sounded in the crisp
sharpness of her voice.
Slowly, unbelievingly, Carrie Louise took a step
towards the door. Lewis Serrocold put a hand on her
shoulder.
‘No, dearest, let me go.’
He went out through the doorway. Dr Maverick,
with a doubtful glance at Edgar, followed him. Miss
Bellever went with them.
109

p

q

Miss Marple gently urged Carrie Louise into a chair.
She sat down, her eyes looking hurt and stricken.
‘Christian – shot?’ she said again.
It was the bewildered hurt tone of a child.
Walter Hudd remained close to Edgar Lawson,
glowering down at him. In his hand he held the gun
that he had picked up from the ﬂoor.
Mrs Serrocold said in a wondering voice:
‘But who could possibly want to shoot Christian?’
It was not a question that demanded an answer.
Walter muttered under his breath:
‘Nuts! The whole lot of them.’
Stephen had moved protectively closer to Gina.
Her young startled face was the most vivid thing in
the room.
Suddenly the front door opened and a rush of
cold air together with a man in a big overcoat came
in.
The heartiness of his greeting seemed incredibly
shocking.
‘Hallo, everybody, what’s going on tonight? A lot of
fog on the road. I had to go dead slow.’
For a startled moment, Miss Marple thought that she
was seeing double. Surely the same man could not be
standing by Gina and coming in by the door. Then
she realized that it was only a likeness and not, when
you looked closely, such a very strong likeness. The
110

They do it with Mirrors

two men were clearly brothers with a strong family
resemblance, but no more.
Where Stephen Restarick was thin to the point of
emaciation the newcomer was sleek. The big coat with
the astrakhan collar ﬁtted the sleekness of body snugly.
A handsome young man, and one who bore upon him
the authority and good humour of success.
But Miss Marple noted one thing about him. His
eyes, as he entered the hall, looked immediately at
Gina.
He said, a little doubtfully:
‘You did expect me? You got my wire?’
He was speaking now to Carrie Louise. He came
towards her.
Almost mechanically, she put her hand out to him.
He took it and kissed it gently. It was an affectionate
act of homage, not a mere theatrical courtesy.
She murmured:
‘Of course, Alex dear – of course. Only, you see –
things have been happening –’
‘Happening?’
Mildred gave the information, gave it with a kind of
grim relish that Miss Marple found distasteful.
‘Christian Gulbrandsen,’ she said. ‘My brother
Christian Gulbrandsen has been found shot dead.’
‘Good God,’ Alex registered a more than life-size
dismay. ‘Suicide, do you mean?’
111

p

q

Carrie Louise moved swiftly.
‘Oh no,’ she said. ‘It couldn’t be suicide. Not
Christian! Oh no.’
‘Uncle Christian would never shoot himself, I’m
sure,’ said Gina.
Alex Restarick looked from one person to the other.
From his brother Stephen he received a short conﬁrmative nod. Walter Hudd stared back at him with
faint resentment. Alex’s eyes rested on Miss Marple
with a sudden frown. It was as though he had found
some unwanted prop on a stage set.
He looked as though he would like her explained.
But nobody explained her, and Miss Marple continued to look an old, ﬂuffy and sweetly bewildered
old lady.
‘When?’ asked Alex. ‘When did this happen, I mean?’
‘Just before you arrived,’ said Gina. ‘About – oh
three or four minutes ago, I suppose. Why, of course,
we actually heard the shot. Only we didn’t notice it –
not really.’
‘Didn’t notice it? Why not?’
‘Well, you see, there were other things going on . . .’
Gina spoke rather hesitantly.
‘Sure were,’ said Walter with emphasis.
Juliet Bellever came into the Hall by the door from
the library.
‘Mr Serrocold suggests that we should all wait in the
112

They do it with Mirrors

library. It would be convenient for the police. Except
for Mrs Serrocold. You’ve had a shock, Cara. I’ve
ordered some hot bottles to be put in your bed. I’ll
take you up and –’
Rising to her feet, Carrie Louise shook her head.
‘I must see Christian ﬁrst,’ she said.
‘Oh no, dear. Don’t upset yourself –’
Carrie Louise put her very gently to one side.
‘Dear Jolly – you don’t understand.’ She looked
round and said, ‘Jane?’
Miss Marple had already moved towards her.
‘Come with me, will you, Jane.’
They moved together towards the door. Dr Maverick,
coming in, almost collided with them.
Miss Bellever exclaimed:
‘Dr Maverick. Do stop her. So foolish.’
Carrie Louise looked calmly at the young doctor.
She even gave a tiny smile.
Dr Maverick said: ‘You want to go and – see him?’
‘I must.’
‘I see.’ He stood aside. ‘If you feel you must, Mrs
Serrocold. But afterwards, please go and lie down and
let Miss Bellever look after you. At the moment you
do not feel the shock, but I assure you that you
will do so.’
‘Yes. I expect you are right. I will be quite sensible.
Come, Jane.’
113

p

q

The two women moved out through the door, past
the foot of the main staircase and along the corridor,
past the dining-room on the right and the double
doors leading to the kitchen quarters on the left, past
the side door to the terrace and on to the door that
gave admission to the Oak suite that had been allotted
to Christian Gulbrandsen. It was a room furnished
as a sitting-room more than a bedroom, with a bed
in an alcove to one side and a door leading into a
dressing-room and bathroom.
Carrie Louise stopped on the threshold. Christian
Gulbrandsen had been sitting at the big mahogany
desk with a small portable typewriter open in front
of him. He sat there now, but slumped sideways in
the chair. The high arms of the chair prevented him
from slipping to the ﬂoor.
Lewis Serrocold was standing by the window. He
had pulled the curtain a little aside and was gazing out
into the night.
He looked round and frowned.
‘My dearest, you shouldn’t have come.’
He came towards her and she stretched out a hand
to him. Miss Marple retreated a step or two.
‘Oh yes, Lewis. I had to – see him. One has to know
just exactly how things are.’
She walked slowly towards the desk.
Lewis said warningly:
114

They do it with Mirrors

‘You mustn’t touch anything. The police must have
things left exactly as we found them.’
‘Of course. He was shot deliberately by someone,
then?’
‘Oh yes.’ Lewis Serrocold looked a little surprised
that the question had even been asked. ‘I thought –
you knew that?’
‘I did really. Christian would not commit suicide,
and he was such a competent person that it could not
possibly have been an accident. That only leaves’ – she
hesitated a moment – ‘murder.’
She walked up behind the desk and stood looking
down at the dead man. There was sorrow and affection
in her face.
‘Dear Christian,’ she said. ‘He was always good
to me.’
Softly, she touched the top of his head with her
ﬁngers.
‘Bless you and thank you, dear Christian,’ she said.
Lewis Serrocold said with something more like
emotion than Miss Marple had ever seen in him
before:
‘I wish to God I could have spared you this, Caroline.’
His wife shook her head gently.
‘You can’t really spare anyone anything,’ she said.
‘Things always have to be faced sooner or later. And
therefore it had better be sooner. I’ll go and lie down
115

p

q

now. I suppose you’ll stay here, Lewis, until the police
come?’
‘Yes.’
Carrie Louise turned away and Miss Marple slipped
an arm round her.

116

Chapter 9

I
Inspector Curry and his entourage found Miss Bellever
alone in the Great Hall when they arrived.
She came forward efﬁciently.
‘I am Juliet Bellever, companion and secretary to Mrs
Serrocold.’
‘It was you who found the body and telephoned to
us?’
‘Yes. Most of the household are in the library –
through that door there. Mr Serrocold remained in Mr
Gulbrandsen’s room to see that nothing was disturbed.
Dr Maverick, who ﬁrst examined the body, will be here
very shortly. He had to take a – case over to the other
wing. Shall I lead the way?’
‘If you please.’
‘Competent woman,’ thought the Inspector to himself. ‘Seems to have got the whole thing taped.’
He followed her along the corridor.
117

p

q

For the next twenty minutes the routine of police
procedure was duly set in motion. The photographer
took the necessary pictures. The police surgeon arrived
and was joined by Dr Maverick. Half an hour later,
the ambulance had taken away the mortal remains of
Christian Gulbrandsen, and Inspector Curry started his
ofﬁcial interrogation.
Lewis Serrocold took him into the library, and he
glanced keenly round the assembled people, making
brief notes in his mind. An old lady with white hair, a
middle-aged lady, the good looking girl he’d seen driving her car round the countryside, that sulky looking
American husband of hers. A couple of young men
who were mixed up in the outﬁt somewhere or other
and the capable woman, Miss Bellever, who’d phoned
him and met him on arrival.
Inspector Curry had already thought out a little
speech and he now delivered it as planned.
‘I’m afraid this is all very upsetting to you,’ he said,
‘and I hope not to keep you too long this evening.
We can go into things more thoroughly tomorrow.
It was Miss Bellever who found Mr Gulbrandsen
dead, and I’ll ask Miss Bellever to give me an outline
of the general situation as that will save too much
repetition. Mr Serrocold, if you want to go up to
your wife, please do, and when I have ﬁnished with
Miss Bellever, I should like to talk to you. Is that
118

They do it with Mirrors

all quite clear? Perhaps there is some small room
where –’
Lewis Serrocold said: ‘My ofﬁce, Jolly?’
Miss Bellever nodded, and said: ‘I was just going to
suggest it.’
She led the way across the Great Hall, and Inspector
Curry and his attendant Sergeant followed her.
Miss Bellever arranged them and herself suitably. It
might have been she and not Inspector Curry who was
in charge of the investigation.
The moment had come, however, when the initiative
passed to him. Inspector Curry had a pleasant voice
and manner. He looked quiet and serious and just a
little apologetic. Some people made the mistake of
underrating him. Actually he was as competent in his
way as Miss Bellever was in hers. But he preferred not
to make a parade of the fact.
He cleared his throat.
‘I’ve had the main facts from Mr Serrocold. Mr
Christian Gulbrandsen was the eldest son of the late
Eric Gulbrandsen, the founder of the Gulbrandsen
Trust and Fellowships . . . and all the rest of it. He
was one of the trustees of this place and he arrived
here unexpectedly yesterday. That is correct?’
‘Yes.’
Inspector Curry was pleased by her conciseness. He
went on:
119

p

q

‘Mr Serrocold was away in Liverpool. He returned
this evening by the 6.30 train.’
‘Yes.’
‘After dinner this evening, Mr Gulbrandsen announced
his intention of working in his own room and left the
rest of the party here after coffee had been served.
Correct?’
‘Yes.’
‘Now, Miss Bellever, please tell me in your own
words how you came to discover him dead.’
‘There was a rather unpleasant incident this evening.
A young man, a psychopathic case, became very unbalanced and threatened Mr Serrocold with a revolver.
They were locked in this room. The young man
eventually ﬁred the revolver – you can see the bullet
holes in the wall there. Fortunately Mr Serrocold was
unhurt. After ﬁring the shots, this young man went
completely to pieces. Mr Serrocold sent me to ﬁnd Dr
Maverick. I got through on the house phone but he was
not in his room. I found him with one of his colleagues
and gave him the message and he came here at once. On
my own way back I went to Mr Gulbrandsen’s room. I
wanted to ask him if there was anything he would like
– hot milk, or whisky, before settling for the night. I
knocked, but there was no response, so I opened the
door. I saw that Mr Gulbrandsen was dead. I then rang
you up.’
120

They do it with Mirrors

‘What entrances and exits are there to the house?
And how are they secured? Could anyone have come
in from outside without being heard or seen?’
‘Anyone could have come in by the side door to the
terrace. That is not locked until we all go to bed, as
people come in and out that way to go to the College
buildings.’
‘And you have, I believe, between two hundred
and two hundred and ﬁfty juvenile delinquents in the
College?’
‘Yes. But the College buildings are well secured and
patrolled. I should say it was most unlikely that anyone
could leave the College unsponsored.’
‘We shall have to check up on that, of course.
Had Mr Gulbrandsen given any cause for – shall
we say, rancour? Any unpopular decisions as to
policy?’
Miss Bellever shook her head.
‘Oh no, Mr Gulbrandsen had nothing whatever to do
with the running of the College, or with administrative
matters.’
‘What was the purpose of his visit?’
‘I have no idea.’
‘But he was annoyed to ﬁnd Mr Serrocold absent,
and immediately decided to wait until he returned?’
‘Yes.’
‘So his business here was deﬁnitely with Mr Serrocold?’
121

p

q

‘Yes. But it would be – because it would be almost
certainly business to do with the Institute.’
‘Yes, presumably that is so. Did he have a conference
with Mr Serrocold?’
‘No, there was no time. Mr Serrocold only arrived
just before dinner this evening.’
‘But after dinner, Mr Gulbrandsen said he had
important letters to write and went away to do so.
He didn’t suggest a session with Mr Serrocold?’
Miss Bellever hesitated.
‘No. No, he didn’t.’
‘Surely that was rather odd – if he had waited on at
inconvenience to himself to see Mr Serrocold?’
‘Yes, it was odd.’
The oddness of it seemed to strike Miss Bellever for
the ﬁrst time.
‘Mr Serrocold did not accompany him to his room?’
‘No. Mr Serrocold remained in the Hall.’
‘And you have no idea at what time Mr Gulbrandsen
was killed?’
‘I think it is possible that we heard the shot. If so, it
was at twenty-three minutes past nine.’
‘You heard a shot? And it did not alarm you?’
‘The circumstances were peculiar.’
She explained in rather more detail the scene between
Lewis Serrocold and Edgar Lawson which had been in
progress.
122

They do it with Mirrors

‘So it occurred to no one that the shot might actually
have come from within the house?’
‘No. No, I certainly don’t think so. We were all so
relieved, you know, that the shot didn’t come from
in here.’
Miss Bellever added rather grimly:
‘You don’t expect murder and attempted murder in
the same house on the same night.’
Inspector Curry acknowledged the truth of that.
‘All the same,’ said Miss Bellever, suddenly, ‘you
know, I believe that’s what made me go along to Mr
Gulbrandsen’s room later. I did mean to ask him if
he would like anything, but it was a kind of excuse
to reassure myself that everything was all right.’
Inspector Curry stared at her for a moment.
‘What made you think it mightn’t be all right?’
‘I don’t know. I think it was the shot outside. It hadn’t
meant anything at the time. But afterwards it came back
into my mind. I told myself that it was only a backﬁre
from Mr Restarick’s car –’
‘Mr Restarick’s car?’
‘Yes. Alex Restarick. He arrived by car this evening
– he arrived just after all this happened.’
‘I see. When you discovered Mr Gulbrandsen’s
body, did you touch anything in the room?’
‘Of course not.’ Miss Bellever sounded reproachful.
‘Naturally I knew that nothing must be touched or
123

p

q

moved. Mr Gulbrandsen had been shot through the
head but there was no ﬁrearm to be seen, so I knew
it was murder.’
‘And just now, when you took us into the room,
everything was exactly as it had been when you found
the body?’
Miss Bellever considered. She sat back screwing up
her eyes. She had Inspector Curry thought, one of
those photographic memories.
‘One thing was different,’ she said. ‘There was
nothing in the typewriter.’
‘You mean,’ said Inspector Curry, ‘that when you
ﬁrst went in Mr Gulbrandsen had been writing a letter
on the typewriter, and that that letter had since been
removed?’
‘Yes, I’m almost sure that I saw the white edge of
the paper sticking up.’
‘Thank you, Miss Bellever. Who else went into that
room before we arrived?’
‘Mr Serrocold, of course. He remained there when
I came to meet you. And Mrs Serrocold and Miss
Marple went there. Mrs Serrocold insisted.’
‘Mrs Serrocold and Miss Marple,’ said Inspector
Curry. ‘Which is Miss Marple?’
‘The old lady with white hair. She was a school
friend of Mrs Serrocold’s. She came on a visit about
four days ago.’
124

They do it with Mirrors

‘Well, thank you, Miss Bellever. All that you have
told us is quite clear. I’ll go into things with Mr
Serrocold now. Ah, but perhaps – Miss Marple’s an
old lady, isn’t she? I’ll just have a word with her ﬁrst
and then she can go off to bed. Rather cruel to keep an
old lady like that up,’ said Inspector Curry virtuously.
‘This must have been a shock to her.’
‘I’ll tell her, shall I?’
‘If you please.’
Miss Bellever went out. Inspector Curry looked at
the ceiling.
‘Gulbrandsen?’ he said. ‘Why Gulbrandsen? Two
hundred odd maladjusted youngsters on the premises.
No reason any of them shouldn’t have done it. Probably one of them did. But why Gulbrandsen? The
stranger within the gates.’
Sergeant Lake said: ‘Of course we don’t know everything yet.’
Inspector Curry said:
‘So far, we don’t know anything at all.’
He jumped up and was gallant when Miss Marple
came in. She seemed a little ﬂustered and he hurried
to put her at her ease.
‘Now don’t upset yourself, m’am.’ The old ones
like M’am, he thought. To them, police ofﬁcers were
deﬁnitely of the lower classes and should show respect
to their betters. ‘This is all very distressing, I know.
125

p

q

But we’ve just got to get the facts clear. Get it all
clear.’
‘Oh yes, I know,’ said Miss Marple. ‘So difﬁcult,
isn’t it? To be clear about anything, I mean. Because
if you’re looking at one thing, you can’t be looking
at another. And one so often looks at the wrong
thing, though whether because one happens to do
so or because you’re meant to, it’s very hard to say.
Misdirection, the conjurers call it. So clever, aren’t
they? And I never have known how they manage with
a bowl of goldﬁsh – because really that cannot fold up
small, can it?’
Inspector Curry blinked a little and said soothingly:
‘Quite so. Now, m’am, I’ve had an account of this
evening’s events from Miss Bellever. A most anxious
time for all of you, I’m sure.’
‘Yes, indeed. It was all so dramatic, you know.’
‘First this to-do between Mr Serrocold and’ – he
looked down at a note he had made – ‘this Edgar
Lawson.’
‘A very odd young man,’ said Miss Marple. ‘I have
felt all along that there was something wrong about
him.’
‘I’m sure you have,’ said Inspector Curry. ‘And
then, after that excitement was over, there came Mr
Gulbrandsen’s death. I understand that you went with
Mrs Serrocold to see the – er – the body.’
126

They do it with Mirrors

‘Yes, I did. She asked me to come with her. We are
very old friends.’
‘Quite so. And you went along to Mr Gulbrandsen’s
room. Did you touch anything while you were in the
room, either of you?’
‘Oh no. Mr Serrocold warned us not to.’
‘Did you happen to notice, ma’m, whether there was
a letter or a piece of paper, say, in the typewriter?’
‘There wasn’t,’ said Miss Marple promptly. ‘I
noticed that at once because it seemed to me odd.
Mr Gulbrandsen was sitting there at the typewriter so
he must have been typing something. Yes, I thought
it very odd.’
Inspector Curry looked at her sharply. He said:
‘Did you have much conversation with Mr
Gulbrandsen while he was here?’
‘Very little.’
‘There is nothing especial – or signiﬁcant that you
can remember?’
Miss Marple considered.
‘He asked me about Mrs Serrocold’s health. In
particular, about her heart.’
‘Her heart? Is there something wrong with her
heart?’
‘Nothing whatever, I understand.’
Inspector Curry was silent for a moment or two, then
he said:
127

p

q

‘You heard a shot this evening during the quarrel
between Mr Serrocold and Edgar Lawson?’
‘I didn’t actually hear it myself. I am a little deaf,
you know. But Mrs Serrocold mentioned it as being
outside in the park.’
‘Mr Gulbrandsen left the party immediately after
dinner, I understand?’
‘Yes, he said he had letters to write.’
‘He didn’t show any wish for a business conference
with Mr Serrocold?’
‘No.’
Miss Marple added:
‘You see, they’d already had one little talk.’
‘They had? When? I understood that Mr Serrocold
only returned home just before dinner.’
‘That’s quite true, but he walked up through the
park, and Mr Gulbrandsen went out to meet him and
they walked up and down the terrace together.’
‘Who else knows this?’
‘I shouldn’t think anybody else,’ said Miss Marple.
‘Unless, of course, Mr Serrocold told Mrs Serrocold.
I just happened to be looking out of my window – at
some birds.’
‘Birds?’
‘Birds,’ Miss Marple added after a moment or two:
‘I thought, perhaps, they might be siskins.’
Inspector Curry was uninterested in siskins.
128

They do it with Mirrors

‘You didn’t,’ he said delicately, ‘happen to – er –
overhear anything of what they said?’
Innocent china blue eyes met his.
‘Only fragments, I’m afraid,’ said Miss Marple
gently.
‘And those fragments?’
Miss Marple was silent for a moment, then she said:
‘I do not know the actual subject of their conversation, but their immediate concern was to keep
whatever it was from the knowledge of Mrs Serrocold.
To spare her – that was how Mr Gulbrandsen put it,
and Mr Serrocold said, “I agree that it is she who
must be considered.” They also mentioned a “big
responsibility” and that they should, perhaps, “take
outside advice.”’
She paused.
‘I think you know, you had better ask Mr Serrocold
himself about all this.’
‘We shall do so, m’am. Now there is nothing else
that struck you as unusual this evening?’
Miss Marple considered.
‘It was all so unusual if you know what I mean –’
‘Quite so. Quite so.’
Something ﬂickered into Miss Marple’s memory.
‘There was one rather unusual incident. Mr Serrocold
stopped Mrs Serrocold from taking her medicine. Miss
Bellever was quite put out about it.’
129

p

q

She smiled in a deprecating fashion.
‘But that, of course, is such a little thing . . .’
‘Yes, of course. Well, thank you, Miss Marple.’
As Miss Marple went out of the room, Sergeant
Lake said:
‘She’s old, but she’s sharp . . .’

130

Chapter 10

I
Lewis Serrocold came into the ofﬁce and immediately the whole focus of the room shifted. He turned
to close the door behind him, and in doing so he
created an atmosphere of privacy. He walked over
and sat down, not in the chair Miss Marple had just
vacated, but in his own chair behind the desk. Miss
Bellever had settled Inspector Curry in a chair drawn
up to one side of the desk, as though unconsciously
she had reserved Lewis Serrocold’s chair against his
coming.
When he had sat down, Lewis Serrocold looked at
the two police ofﬁcers thoughtfully. His face looked
drawn and tired. It was the face of a man who was passing through a severe ordeal, and it surprised Inspector
Curry a little because, though Christian Gulbrandsen’s
death must undeniably have been a shock to Lewis
Serrocold, yet Gulbrandsen had not been a close friend
131

p

q

or relation, only a rather remote connection by marriage.
In an odd way, the tables seemed to have been
turned. It did not seem as though Lewis Serrocold
had come into the room to answer police questioning.
It seemed rather that Lewis Serrocold had arrived to
preside over a court of inquiry. It irritated Inspector
Curry a little.
He said briskly:
‘Now, Mr Serrocold –’
Lewis Serrocold still seemed lost in thought. He
said with a sigh: ‘How difﬁcult it is to know the right
thing to do.’
Inspector Curry said:
‘I think we will be the judges of that, Mr Serrocold.
Now about Mr Gulbrandsen, he arrived unexpectedly,
I understand?’
‘Quite unexpectedly.’
‘You did not know he was coming.’
‘I had not the least idea of it.’
‘And you have no idea of why he came?’
Lewis Serrocold said quietly:
‘Oh yes, I know why he came. He told me.’
‘When?’
‘I walked up from the station. He was watching from
the house and came out to meet me. It was then that
he explained what had brought him here.’
132

They do it with Mirrors

‘Business connected with the Gulbrandsen Institute,
I suppose?’
‘Oh no, it was nothing to do with the Gulbrandsen
Institute.’
‘Miss Bellever seemed to think it was.’
‘Naturally. That would be the assumption. Gulbrandsen did nothing to correct that impression. Neither did
I.’
‘Why, Mr Serrocold?’
Lewis Serrocold said slowly:
‘Because it seemed to both of us important that
no hint should arise as to the real purpose of his
visit.’
‘What was the real purpose?’
Lewis Serrocold was silent for a minute or two. He
sighed.
‘Gulbrandsen came over here regularly twice a
year for meetings of the trustees. The last meeting
was only a month ago. Consequently he was not
due to come over again for another ﬁve months.
I think, therefore, that anyone might realize that
the business that brought him must deﬁnitely be
urgent business, but I still think that the normal
assumption would be that it was a business visit,
and that the matter, however urgent – would be a
Trust matter. As far as I know, Gulbrandsen did
nothing to contradict that impression – or thought
133

p

q

he didn’t. Yes, perhaps that is nearer the truth – he
thought he didn’t.’
‘I’m afraid, Mr Serrocold, that I don’t quite follow you.’
Lewis Serrocold did not answer at once. Then he
said gravely:
‘I fully realize that with Gulbrandsen’s death – which
was murder, undeniably murder, I have got to put all
the facts before you. But frankly, I am concerned for
my wife’s happiness and peace of mind. It is not for me
to dictate to you, Inspector, but if you can see your way
to keeping certain things from her as far as possible I
shall be grateful. You see, Inspector Curry, Christian
Gulbrandsen came here expressly to tell me that he
believed my wife was being slowly and cold-bloodedly
poisoned.’
‘What?’
Curry leaned forward incredulously.
Serrocold nodded.
‘Yes, it was, as you can imagine, a tremendous shock
to me. I had had no suspicion of such a thing myself,
but as soon as Christian told me, I realized that certain
symptoms my wife had complained of lately were
quite compatible with that belief. What she took to be
rheumatism, leg cramps, pain, and occasional sickness.
All that ﬁts in very well with the symptoms of arsenical
poisoning.’
134

They do it with Mirrors

‘Miss Marple told us that Christian Gulbrandsen
asked her about the condition of Mrs Serrocold’s
heart.’
‘Did he now? That’s interesting. I suppose he thought
that a heart poison would be used since it paved the
way to a sudden death without undue suspicion. But
I think myself that arsenic is more likely.’
‘You deﬁnitely think, then, that Christian Gulbrandsen’s suspicions were well founded?’
‘Oh yes, I think so. For one thing, Gulbrandsen
would hardly come to me with such a suggestion
unless he was fairly sure of his facts. He was a cautious
and hard-headed man, difﬁcult to convince, but very
shrewd.’
‘What was his evidence?’
‘We had no time to go into that. Our interview was
a hurried one. It served only the purpose of explaining
his visit, and a mutual agreement that nothing whatever
should be said to my wife about the matter until we
were sure of our facts.’
‘And whom did he suspect of administering poison?’
‘He did not say, and actually I don’t think he knew.
He may have suspected. I think now that he probably
did suspect – otherwise why should he be killed?’
‘But he mentioned no name to you?’
‘He mentioned no name. We agreed that we must
investigate the matter thoroughly, and he suggested
135

p

q

inviting the advice and co-operation of Dr Galbraith,
the Bishop of Cromer. Dr Galbraith is a very old friend
of the Gulbrandsens and is one of the trustees of the
Institute. He is a man of great wisdom and experience
and would be of inﬁnite help and comfort to my wife
if – if it was necessary to tell her of our suspicions.
We meant to rely on his advice as to whether or not
to consult the police.’
‘Quite extraordinary,’ said Curry.
‘Gulbrandsen left us after dinner to write to Dr
Galbraith. He was actually in the act of typing a letter
to him when he was shot.’
‘How do you know?’
Lewis said calmly:
‘Because I took the letter out of the typewriter. I have
it here.’
From his breast pocket, he drew out a folded typewritten sheet of paper and handed it to Curry.
The latter said sharply:
‘You shouldn’t have taken this, or touched anything
in the room.’
‘I touched nothing else. I know that I committed an
unpardonable offence in your eyes in moving this, but
I had a very strong reason. I felt certain that my wife
would insist on coming into the room and I was afraid
that she might read something of what is written here.
I admit myself in the wrong, but I am afraid I would
136

They do it with Mirrors

do the same again. I would do anything – anything –
to save my wife unhappiness.’
Inspector Curry said no more for the moment. He
read the typewritten sheet.
Dear Dr Galbraith.
If it is at all possible, I beg that you will come to
Stonygates as soon as you receive this. A crisis of
extraordinary gravity has arisen and I am at a loss how
to deal with it. I know how deep your affection is for our
dear Carrie Louise, and how grave your concern will be
for anything that affects her. How much has she got to
know? How much can we keep from her? Those are the
questions that I ﬁnd difﬁcult to answer.
Not to beat about the bush, I have reason to believe that
that sweet and innocent lady is being slowly poisoned. I
ﬁrst suspected this when –

Here the letter broke off abruptly.
Curry said:
‘And when he had reached this point Christian
Gulbrandsen was shot?’
‘Yes.’
‘But why on earth was this letter in the typewriter?’
‘I can only conceive of two reasons – one, that the
murderer had no idea to whom Gulbrandsen was writing and what was the subject of the letter. Secondly –
137

p

q

he may not have had time. He may have heard someone
coming and only had just time to escape unobserved.’
‘And Gulbrandsen gave you no hint as to whom he
suspected – if he did suspect anyone?’
There was, perhaps, a very slight pause before Lewis
answered.
‘None whatever.’
He added, rather obscurely:
‘Christian was a very fair man.’
‘How do you think this poison, arsenic or whatever
it may be – was or is being administered?’
‘I thought over that whilst I was changing for dinner
and it seemed to me that the most likely vehicle was
some medicine, a tonic, that my wife was taking. As
regards food, we all partake of the same dishes and
my wife has nothing specially prepared for her. But
anyone could add arsenic to the medicine bottle.’
‘We must take the medicine and have it analysed.’
Lewis said quietly:
‘I already have a sample of it. I took it this evening
before dinner.’
From a drawer in the desk he took out a small corked
bottle with a red ﬂuid in it.
Inspector Curry said with a curious glance:
‘You think of everything, Mr Serrocold.’
‘I believe in acting promptly. Tonight, I stopped my
wife from taking her usual dose. It is still in a glass on
138

They do it with Mirrors

the oak dresser in the Hall – the bottle of tonic itself is
in the dining-room.’
Curry leaned forward across the desk. He lowered
his voice and spoke conﬁdentially and without ofﬁcialdom.
‘You’ll excuse me, Mr Serrocold, but just why are
you so anxious to keep this from your wife? Are you
afraid she’d panic? Surely, for her own sake, it would
be as well if she were warned.’
‘Yes – yes, that may well be so. But I don’t think you
quite understand. Without knowing my wife Caroline,
it would be difﬁcult. My wife, Inspector Curry, is an
idealist, a completely trustful person. Of her it may
truly be said that she sees no evil, hears no evil, and
speaks no evil. It would be inconceivable to her that
anyone could wish to kill her. But we have to go farther
than that. It is not just “anyone.” It is a case – surely
you see that – of someone possibly very near and dear
to her . . .’
‘So that’s what you think?’
‘We have got to face facts. Close at hand we have
a couple of hundred warped and stunted personalities
who have expressed themselves often enough by crude
and senseless violence. But by the very nature of
things, none of them can be suspect in this case. A
slow poisoner is someone living in the intimacy of
family life. Think of the people who are here in this
139

p

q

house; her husband, her daughter, her granddaughter,
her granddaughter’s husband, her stepson whom she
regards as her own son, Miss Bellever her devoted
companion and friend of many years. All very near
and dear to her – and yet the suspicion must arise –
is it one of them?’
Curry said slowly:
‘There are outsiders –’
‘Yes, in a sense. There is Dr Maverick, one or two
of the staff are often with us, there are the servants –
but frankly, what possible motive could they have?’
Inspector Curry said:
‘And there’s young – what is his name again – Edgar
Lawson?’
‘Yes. But he has only been down here as a casual
visitor just lately. He has no possible motive. Besides,
he is deeply attached to Caroline – just as everyone is.’
‘But he’s unbalanced. What about this attack on you
tonight?’
Serrocold waved it aside impatiently.
‘Sheer childishness. He had no intention of harming
me.’
‘Not with these two bullet holes in the wall? He shot
at you, didn’t he?’
‘He didn’t mean to hit me. It was play-acting, no
more.’
140

They do it with Mirrors

‘Rather a dangerous form of play-acting, Mr
Serrocold.’
‘You don’t understand. You must talk to our psychiatrist, Dr Maverick. Edgar is an illegitimate child.
He has consoled himself for his lack of a father and a
humble origin by pretending to himself that he is the
son of a celebrated man. It’s a well-known phenomenon, I assure you. He was improving, improving very
much. Then, for some reason, he had a set-back. He
identiﬁed me as his “father” and made a melodramatic
attack, waving a revolver and uttering threats. I was not
in the least alarmed. When he had actually ﬁred the
revolver, he broke down and sobbed and Dr Maverick
took him away and gave him a sedative. He’ll probably
be quite normal tomorrow morning.’
‘You don’t wish to bring a charge against him?’
‘That would be the worst thing possible – for him,
I mean.’
‘Frankly, Mr Serrocold, it seems to me he ought
to be under restraint. People who go about ﬁring off
revolvers to bolster up their egos – ! One has to think
of the community, you know.’
‘Talk to Dr Maverick on the subject,’ urged Lewis.
‘He’ll give you the professional point of view. In any
case,’ he added, ‘poor Edgar certainly did not shoot
Gulbrandsen. He was in here threatening to shoot
me.’
141

p

q

‘That’s the point I was coming to, Mr Serrocold.
We’ve covered the outside. Anyone, it seems, could
have come in from outside, and shot Mr Gulbrandsen,
since the terrace door was unlocked. But there is a
narrower ﬁeld inside the house, and in view of what
you have been telling me, it seems to me that very close
attention must be paid to that. It seems possible that,
with the exception of old Miss – er – yes, Marple, who
happened to be looking out of her bedroom window,
no one was aware that you and Christian Gulbrandsen
had already had a private interview. If so, Gulbrandsen
may have been shot to prevent him communicating his
suspicions to you. Of course it is too early to say as yet
what other motives may exist. Mr Gulbrandsen was a
wealthy man, I presume?’
‘Yes, he was a very wealthy man. He has sons and
daughters and grandchildren – all of them will probably
beneﬁt by his death. But I do not think that any of his
family are in this country, and they are all solid and
highly respectable people. As far as I know, there are
no black sheep amongst them.’
‘Had he any enemies?’
‘I should think it most unlikely. He was – really, he
was not that type of man.’
‘So it boils down, doesn’t it, to this house and the
people in it? Who from inside the house could have
killed him?’
142

They do it with Mirrors

Lewis Serrocold said slowly:
‘That is difﬁcult for me to say. There are the servants and the members of my household and our
guests. They are, from your point of view, all possibilities, I suppose. I can only tell you that, as far as
I know, everyone except the servants was in the Great
Hall when Christian left it, and whilst I was there,
nobody left it.’
‘Nobody at all?’
‘I think’ – Lewis frowned in an effort of remembrance – ‘oh yes. Some of the lights fused – Mr Walter
Hudd went to see to it.’
‘That’s the young American gentleman?’
‘Yes – of course I don’t know what took place after
Edgar and I came in here.’
‘And you can’t give me anything nearer than that,
Mr Serrocold?’
Lewis Serrocold shook his head.
‘No, I’m afraid I can’t help you. It’s – it’s all quite
inconceivable.’
Inspector Curry sighed. He said: ‘Mr Gulbrandsen
was shot with a small automatic pistol. Do you know
if anyone in the house has such a weapon?’
‘I have no idea, I should think it most unlikely.’
Inspector Curry sighed again. He said:
‘You can tell the party that they can all go to bed.
I’ll talk to them tomorrow.’
143

p

q

When Serrocold had left the room, Inspector Curry
said to Lake:
‘Well – what do you think?’
‘Knows – or thinks he knows, who did it,’ said
Lake.
‘Yes. I agree with you. And he doesn’t like it a
bit . . .’

144

Chapter 11

I
Gina greeted Miss Marple with a rush as the latter
came down to breakfast the next morning.
‘The police are here again,’ she said. ‘They’re in
the library this time. Wally is absolutely fascinated by
them. He can’t understand their being so quiet and so
remote. I think he’s really quite thrilled by the whole
thing. I’m not. I hate it. I think it’s horrible. Why do
you think I’m so upset? Because I’m half Italian?’
‘Very possibly. At least perhaps it explains why you
don’t mind showing what you feel.’
Miss Marple smiled just a little as she said this.
‘Jolly’s frightfully cross,’ said Gina, hanging on Miss
Marple’s arm and propelling her into the dining-room.
‘I think really because the police are in charge and
she can’t exactly “run” them like she runs everybody else.
‘Alex and Stephen,’ continued Gina severely, as they
145

p

q

came into the dining-room where the two brothers were
ﬁnishing their breakfast, ‘just don’t care.’
‘Gina dearest,’ said Alex, ‘you are most unkind.
Good morning, Miss Marple. I care intensely. Except
for the fact that I hardly knew your Uncle Christian,
I’m far and away the best suspect. You do realize that,
I hope.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, I was driving up to the house at about the
right time, it seems. And they’ve been checking up on
things, and it seems that I took too much time between
the lodge and the house – time enough, the implication
is, to leave the car, run round the house, go in through
the side door, shoot Christian and rush out and back
to the car again.’
‘And what were you really doing?’
‘I thought little girls were taught quite young not
to ask indelicate questions. Like an idiot, I stood for
several minutes taking in the fog effect in the headlights
and thinking what I’d use to get that effect on a stage.
For my new “Limehouse” ballet.’
‘But you can tell them that!’
‘Naturally. But you know what policemen are like.
They say “thank you” very civilly and write it all down,
and you’ve no idea what they are thinking except that
one does feel they have rather sceptical minds.’
‘It would amuse me to see you in a spot, Alex,’ said
146

They do it with Mirrors

Stephen with his thin, rather cruel smile. ‘Now, I ’m
quite all right! I never left the Hall last night.’
Gina cried, ‘But they couldn’t possibly think it was
one of us!’
Her dark eyes were round and dismayed.
‘Don’t say it must have been a tramp, dear,’ said
Alex, helping himself lavishly to marmalade. ‘It’s so
hackneyed.’
Miss Bellever looked in at the door and said:
‘Miss Marple, when you have ﬁnished your breakfast, will you go to the library?’
‘You again,’ said Gina. ‘Before any of us.’
She seemed a little injured.
‘Hi, what was that?’ asked Alex.
‘Didn’t hear anything,’ said Stephen.
‘It was a pistol shot.’
‘They’ve been ﬁring shots in the room where Uncle
Christian was killed,’ said Gina. ‘I don’t know why.
And outside too.’
The door opened again and Mildred Strete came in.
She was wearing black with some onyx beads.
She murmured good morning without looking at
anyone and sat down.
In a hushed voice she said:
‘Some tea, please, Gina. Nothing much to eat – just
some toast.’
She touched her nose and her eyes delicately with the
147

q

p

handkerchief she held in one hand. Then she raised her
eyes and looked in an unseeing way at the two brothers.
Stephen and Alex became uncomfortable. Their voices
dropped to almost a whisper and presently they got up
and left.
Mildred Strete said, whether to the universe or Miss
Marple was not quite certain, ‘Not even a black tie!’
‘I don’t suppose,’ said Miss Marple apologetically,
‘that they knew beforehand that a murder was going
to happen.’
Gina made a smothered sound and Mildred Strete
looked sharply at her.
‘Where’s Walter this morning?’ she asked.
Gina ﬂushed.
‘I don’t know. I haven’t seen him.’
She sat there uneasily like a guilty child.
Miss Marple got up.
‘I’ll go to the library now,’ she said.

II
Lewis Serrocold was standing by the window in the
library.
There was no one else in the room.
He turned as Miss Marple came in and came forward
to meet her, taking her hand in his.
148

They do it with Mirrors

‘I hope,’ he said, ‘that you are not feeling the worse
for the shock. To be at close quarters with what is
undoubtedly murder must be a great strain on anyone
who has not come in contact with such a thing before.’
Modesty forbade Miss Marple to reply that she was,
by now, quite at home with murder. She merely said
that life in St Mary Mead was not quite so sheltered
as outside people believed.
‘Very nasty things go on in a village, I assure you,’
she said. ‘One has an opportunity of studying things
there that one would never have in a town.’
Lewis Serrocold listened indulgently, but with only
half an ear.
He said very simply: ‘I want your help.’
‘But of course, Mr Serrocold.’
‘It is a matter that affects my wife – affects Caroline.
I think that you are really attached to her?’
‘Yes, indeed. Everyone is.’
‘That is what I believed. It seems that I am wrong.
With the permission of Inspector Curry, I am going to
tell you something that no one else as yet knows. Or
perhaps I should say what only one person knows.’
Brieﬂy, he told her what he had told Inspector Curry
the night before.
Miss Marple looked horriﬁed.
‘I can’t believe it, Mr Serrocold. I really can’t believe
it.’
149

p

q

‘That is what I felt when Christian Gulbrandsen
told me.’
‘I should have said that dear Carrie Louise had not
got an enemy in the world.’
‘It seems incredible that she should have. But you
see the implication? Poisoning – slow poisoning –
is an intimate family matter. It must be one of our
closely-knit little household –’
‘If it is true. Are you sure that Mr Gulbrandsen was
not mistaken?’
‘Christian was not mistaken. He is too cautious a
man to make such a statement without foundation.
Besides, the police took away Caroline’s medicine
bottle and a separate sample of its contents. There
was arsenic in both of them – and arsenic was not prescribed. The actual quantitative tests will take longer
– but the actual fact of arsenic being present is established.’
‘Then her rheumatism – the difﬁculty in walking –
all that –’
‘Yes, leg cramps are typical, I understand. Also,
before you came, Caroline has had one or two severe
attacks of a gastric nature – I never dreamed until
Christian came –’
He broke off. Miss Marple said softly: ‘So Ruth
was right!’
‘Ruth?’
150

They do it with Mirrors

Lewis Serrocold sounded surprised. Miss Marple
ﬂushed.
‘There is something I have not told you. My coming
here was not entirely fortuitous. If you will let me
explain – I’m afraid I tell things so badly. Please have
patience.’
Lewis Serrocold listened whilst Miss Marple told
him of Ruth’s unease and urgency.
‘Extraordinary,’ he commented. ‘I had no idea of
this.’
‘It was all so vague,’ said Miss Marple. ‘Ruth herself
didn’t know why she had this feeling. There must be
a reason – in my experience there always is – but
“something wrong” was as near as she could get.’
Lewis Serrocold said grimly:
‘Well, it seems that she was right. Now, Miss Marple,
you see how I am placed. Am I to tell Carrie Louise
of this?’
Miss Marple said quickly: ‘Oh no,’ in a distressed
voice, and then ﬂushed and stared doubtfully at Lewis.
He nodded.
‘So you feel as I do? As Christian Gulbrandsen did.
Should we feel like that with an ordinary woman?’
‘Carrie Louise is not an ordinary woman. She lives
by her trust, by her belief in human nature – oh dear,
I am expressing myself very badly. But I do feel that
until we know who –’
151

p

q

‘Yes, that is the crux. But you do see, Miss Marple,
that there is a risk in saying nothing –’
‘And so you want me to – how shall I put it? – watch
over her?’
‘You see, you are the only person whom I can
trust,’ said Lewis Serrocold simply. ‘Everyone here
seems devoted. But are they? Now your attachment
goes back many years.’
‘And also I only arrived a few days ago,’ said Miss
Marple pertinently.
Lewis Serrocold smiled.
‘Exactly.’
‘It is a very mercenary question,’ said Miss Marple
apologetically. ‘But who exactly would beneﬁt if dear
Carrie Louise were to die?’
‘Money!’ said Lewis bitterly. ‘It always boils down
to money, doesn’t it?’
‘Well, I really think it must be in this case. Because
Carrie Louise is a very sweet person with a great deal of
charm, and one cannot really imagine anyone disliking
her. She couldn’t, I mean, have an enemy. So then it
does boil down, as you put it, to a question of money,
because as you don’t need me to tell you, Mr Serrocold,
people will quite often do anything for money.’
‘I suppose so, yes.’
He went on: ‘Naturally Inspector Curry has already
taken up that point. Mr Gilfoy is coming down from
152

They do it with Mirrors

London today and can give detailed information. Gilfoy,
Gilfoy, Jaimes and Gilfoy are a very eminent ﬁrm of
lawyers. This Gilfoy’s father was one of the original
trustees, and they drew up both Caroline’s will and the
original will of Eric Gulbrandsen. I will put it in simple
terms for you –’
‘Thank you,’ said Miss Marple gratefully. ‘So mystifying the law, I always think.’
‘Eric Gulbrandsen, after endowment of the College
and various fellowships and trusts and other charitable
bequests, and having settled an equal sum on his
daughter Mildred and on his adopted daughter Pippa
(Gina’s mother), left the remainder of his vast fortune
in trust, the income from it to be paid to Caroline for
her lifetime.’
‘And after her death?’
‘After her death it was to be divided equally between
Mildred and Pippa – or their children if they themselves
had predeceased Caroline.’
‘So that in fact it goes to Mrs Strete and to Gina.’
‘Yes. Caroline has also quite a considerable fortune of her own – though not in the Gulbrandsen
class. Half of this she made over to me four years
ago. Of the remaining amount, she left ten thousand pounds to Juliet Bellever, and the rest equally
divided between Alex and Stephen Restarick, her two
stepsons.’
153

p

q

‘Oh dear,’ said Miss Marple. ‘That’s bad. That’s
very bad.’
‘You mean?’
‘It means everyone in the house had a ﬁnancial
motive.’
‘Yes. And yet, you know, I can’t believe that any
of these people would do murder. I simply can’t . . .
Mildred is her daughter – and already quite well provided for. Gina is devoted to her grandmother. She is
generous and extravagant, but has no acquisitive feelings. Jolly Bellever is fanatically devoted to Caroline.
The two Restaricks care for Caroline as though she
were really their mother. They have no money of their
own to speak of, but quite a lot of Caroline’s income has
gone towards ﬁnancing their enterprises – especially so
with Alex. I simply can’t believe either of those two
would deliberately poison her for the sake of inheriting
money at her death. I just can’t believe any of it, Miss
Marple.’
‘There’s Gina’s husband, isn’t there?’
‘Yes,’ said Lewis gravely. ‘There is Gina’s husband.’
‘You don’t really know much about him. And one
can’t help seeing that he’s a very unhappy young
man.’
Lewis sighed.
‘He hasn’t ﬁtted in here – no. He’s no interest in or
154

They do it with Mirrors

sympathy for what we’re trying to do. But after all, why
should he? He’s young, crude, and he comes from a
country where a man is esteemed by the success he
makes of life.’
‘Whilst here we are so very fond of failures,’ said
Miss Marple.
Lewis Serrocold looked at her sharply and suspiciously.
She ﬂushed a little and murmured rather incoherently:
‘I think sometimes, you know, one can overdo things
the other way . . . I mean the young people with a good
heredity, and brought up wisely in a good home – and
with grit and pluck and the ability to get on in life –
well, they are really, when one comes down to it – the
sort of people a country needs.’
Lewis frowned and Miss Marple hurried on, getting
pinker and pinker and more and more incoherent.
‘Not that I don’t appreciate – I do indeed – you and
Carrie Louise – a really noble work – real compassion –
and one should have compassion – because after all it’s
what people are that counts – good and bad luck – and
much more expected (and rightly) of the lucky ones.
But I do think sometimes one’s sense of proportion
– oh, I don’t mean you, Mr Serrocold. Really I don’t
know what I mean – but the English are rather odd that
way. Even in war, so much prouder of their defeats and
155

p

q

their retreats than of their victories. Foreigners never
can understand why we’re so proud of Dunkirk. It’s the
sort of thing they’d prefer not to mention themselves.
But we always seem to be almost embarrassed by a
victory – and treat it as though it weren’t quite nice to
boast about it. And look at all our poets! The Charge
of the Light Brigade, and the little Revenge went down
in the Spanish Main. It’s really a very odd characteristic
when you come to think of it!’
Miss Marple drew a fresh breath.
‘What I really mean is that everything here must
seem rather peculiar to young Walter Hudd.’
‘Yes,’ Lewis allowed. ‘I see your point. And Walter
has certainly a ﬁne war record. There’s no doubt about
his bravery.’
‘Not that that helps,’ said Miss Marple candidly.
‘Because war is one thing, and everyday life is quite
another. And actually to commit a murder, I think you
do need bravery – or perhaps, more often, just conceit.
Yes, conceit.’
‘But I would hardly say that Walter Hudd had a
sufﬁcient motive.’
‘Wouldn’t you?’ said Miss Marple. ‘He hates it here.
He wants to get away. He wants to get Gina away. And
if it’s really money he wants, it would be important for
Gina to get all the money before she – er – deﬁnitely
forms an attachment to someone else.’
156

They do it with Mirrors

‘An attachment to someone else,’ said Lewis, in an
astonished voice.
Miss Marple wondered at the blindness of enthusiastic social reformers.
‘That’s what I said. Both the Restaricks are in love
with her, you know.’
‘Oh, I don’t think so,’ said Lewis absently.
He went on:
‘Stephen’s invaluable to us – quite invaluable. The
way he’s got those lads coming along – keen – interested. They gave a splendid show last month. Scenery,
costumes, everything. It just shows, as I’ve always said
to Maverick, that it’s lack of drama in their lives that
leads these boys to crime. To dramatize yourself is
a child’s natural instinct. Maverick says – ah yes,
Maverick –’
Lewis broke off.
‘I want Maverick to see Inspector Curry about Edgar.
The whole thing is so ridiculous really.’
‘What do you really know about Edgar Lawson, Mr
Serrocold?’
‘Everything,’ said Lewis positively. ‘Everything, that
is, that one needs to know. His background, upbringing
– his deep-seated lack of conﬁdence in himself –’
Miss Marple interrupted.
‘Couldn’t Edgar Lawson have poisoned Mrs
Serrocold?’ she asked.
157

p

q

‘Hardly. He’s only been here a few weeks. And
anyway, it’s ridiculous! Why should Edgar want to
poison my wife? What could he possibly gain by
doing so?’
‘Nothing material, I know. But he might have – some
odd reason. He is odd, you know.’
‘You mean unbalanced?’
‘I suppose so. No, I don’t – not quite. What I mean
is, he’s all wrong.’
It was not a very lucid exposition of what she felt.
Lewis Serrocold accepted the words at their face value.
‘Yes,’ he said with a sigh. ‘He’s all wrong, poor
lad. And he was showing such marked improvement.
I can’t really understand why he had this sudden
set-back . . .’
Miss Marple leaned forward eagerly.
‘Yes, that’s what I wondered. If –’
She broke off as Inspector Curry came into the
room.

158

Chapter 12

I
Lewis Serrocold went away, and Inspector Curry sat
down and gave Miss Marple a rather peculiar smile.
‘So Mr Serrocold has been asking you to act as watch
dog,’ he said.
‘Well, yes,’ she added apologetically: ‘I hope you
don’t mind –’
‘I don’t mind. I think it’s a very good idea. Does
Mr Serrocold know just how well qualiﬁed you are for
the post?’
‘I don’t quite understand, Inspector.’
‘I see. He thinks you’re just a very nice elderly lady
who was at school with his wife.’ He shook his head
at her. ‘We know you’re a bit more than that, Miss
Marple, aren’t you? Crime is right down your street.
Mr Serrocold only knows one aspect of crime – the
promising beginners. Makes me a bit sick, sometimes.
159

p

q

Daresay I’m wrong and old-fashioned. But there are
plenty of good decent lads about, lads who could do
with a start in life. But there, honesty has to be its own
reward – millionaires don’t leave trust funds to help
the worthwhile. Well – well, don’t pay any attention to
me. I’m old-fashioned. I’ve seen boys – and girls – with
everything against them, bad homes, bad luck, every
disadvantage, and they’ve had the grit to win through.
That’s the kind I shall leave my packet to, if I ever have
one. But then, of course, that’s what I never shall have.
Just my pension and a nice bit of garden.’
He nodded his head at Miss Marple.
‘Superintendent Blacker told me about you last night.
Said you’d had a lot of experience of the seamy side
of human nature. Well now, let’s have your point of
view. Who’s the nigger in the woodpile? The G.I.
husband?’
‘That,’ said Miss Marple, ‘would be very convenient
for everybody.’
Inspector Curry smiled softly to himself.
‘A G.I. pinched my best girl,’ he said reminiscently.
‘Naturally, I’m prejudiced. His manner doesn’t help.
Let’s have the amateur point of view. Who’s been
secretly and systematically poisoning Mrs Serrocold?’
‘Well,’ said Miss Marple judicially, ‘one is always
inclined, human nature being what it is, to think of
the husband. Or if it’s the other way round, the wife.
160

They do it with Mirrors

That’s the ﬁrst assumption, don’t you think, in a
poisoning case?’
‘I agree with you every time,’ said Inspector Curry.
‘But really – in this case –’ Miss Marple shook her
head. ‘No, frankly – I can not seriously consider Mr
Serrocold. Because you see, Inspector, he really is
devoted to his wife. Naturally he would make a parade
of being so – but it isn’t a parade. It’s very quiet, but
it’s genuine. He loves his wife, and I’m quite certain
that he wouldn’t poison her.’
‘To say nothing of the fact that he wouldn’t have
any motive for doing so. She’s made over her money
to him already.’
‘Of course,’ said Miss Marple primly, ‘there are other
reasons for a gentleman wanting his wife out of the
way. An attachment to a young woman, for instance.
But I really don’t see any signs of it in this case. Mr
Serrocold does not act as though he had any romantic
preoccupation. I’m really afraid,’ she sounded quite
regretful about it, ‘we shall have to wash him out.’
‘Regrettable, isn’t it?’ said the Inspector. He grinned.
‘And anyway, he couldn’t have killed Gulbrandsen.
It seems to me that there’s no doubt that the one
thing hinges on the other. Whoever is poisoning Mrs
Serrocold killed Gulbrandsen to prevent him spilling
the beans. What we’ve got to get at now is who had
an opportunity to kill Gulbrandsen last night. And our
161

p

q

prize suspect – there’s no doubt about it – is young
Walter Hudd. It was he who switched on a reading
lamp which resulted in a fuse going, thereby giving
him the opportunity to leave the Hall and go to the
fuse box. The fuse box is in the kitchen passage which
opens off from the main corridor. It was during his
absence from the Great Hall that the shot was heard.
So that’s suspect No. 1 perfectly placed for committing
the crime.’
‘And suspect No. 2?’ asked Miss Marple.
‘Suspect No. 2 is Alex Restarick, who was alone in
his car between the lodge and the house and took too
long getting there.’
‘Anybody else?’ Miss Marple leaned forward eagerly
– remembering to add: ‘It’s very kind of you to tell me
all this.’
‘It’s not kindness,’ said Inspector Curry. ‘I’ve got to
have your help. You put your ﬁnger on the spot when
you said “Anybody else?” Because there I’ve got to
depend on you. You were there, in the Hall last night,
and you can tell me who left it . . .’
‘Yes – yes, I ought to be able to tell you . . . But can
I? You see – the circumstances –’
‘You mean that you were all listening to the argument
going on behind the door of Mr Serrocold’s study.’
Miss Marple nodded vehemently.
‘Yes, you see we were all really very frightened. Mr
162

They do it with Mirrors

Lawson looked – he really did – quite demented. Apart
from Mrs Serrocold, who seemed quite unaffected, we
all feared that he would do a mischief to Mr Serrocold.
He was shouting, you know, and saying the most
terrible things – we could hear them quite plainly –
and what with that and with most of the lights being
out – I didn’t really notice anything else.’
‘You mean that whilst that scene was going on,
anybody could have slipped out of the Hall, gone
along the corridor, shot Mr Gulbrandsen and slipped
back again?’
‘I think it would have been possible . . .’
‘Could you say deﬁnitely that anybody was in the
Great Hall the whole time?’
Miss Marple considered.
‘I could say that Mrs Serrocold was – because I was
watching her. She was sitting quite close to the study
door, and she never moved from her seat. It surprised
me, you know, that she was able to remain so calm.’
‘And the others?’
‘Miss Bellever went out – but I think – I am almost
sure – that that was after the shot. Mrs Strete? I really
don’t know. She was sitting behind me, you see. Gina
was over by the far window. I think she remained there
the whole time but of course I cannot be sure. Stephen
was at the piano. He stopped playing when the quarrel
began to get heated –’
163

p

q

‘We mustn’t be misled by the time you heard the
shot,’ said Inspector Curry. ‘That’s a trick that’s been
done before now, you know. Fake up a shot so as to ﬁx
the time of a crime, and ﬁx it wrong. If Miss Bellever
had cooked up something of that kind (far fetched – but
you never know) then she’d leave as she did, openly,
after the shot was heard. No, we can’t go by the shot.
The limits are between when Christian Gulbrandsen
left the Hall to the moment when Miss Bellever found
him dead, and we can only eliminate those people who
were known not to have had opportunity. That gives us
Lewis Serrocold and young Edgar Lawson in the study,
and Mrs Serrocold in the Hall. It’s very unfortunate,
of course, that Gulbrandsen should be shot on the
same evening that this schemozzle happened between
Serrocold and this young Lawson.’
‘Just unfortunate, you think?’ murmured Miss
Marple.
‘Oh? What do you think?’
‘It occurred to me,’ murmured Miss Marple, ‘that it
might have been contrived.’
‘So that’s your idea?’
‘Well, everybody seems to think it very odd that
Edgar Lawson should quite suddenly have a relapse,
so to speak. He’d got this curious complex, or whatever the term is, about his unknown father. Winston
Churchill and Viscount Montgomery – all quite likely
164

They do it with Mirrors

in his state of mind. Just any famous man he happened
to think of. But suppose somebody puts it into his head
that it’s Lewis Serrocold who is really his father, that it’s
Lewis Serrocold who has been persecuting him – that
he ought by rights to be the Crown Prince as it were
of Stonygates. In his weak mental state he’ll accept the
idea – work himself up into a frenzy, and sooner or
later will make the kind of scene he did make. And what
a wonderful cover that will be! Everybody will have
their attention ﬁxed on the dangerous situation that is
developing – especially if somebody has thoughtfully
supplied him with a revolver.’
‘Hm, yes. Walter Hudd’s revolver.’
‘Oh yes,’ said Miss Marple, ‘I’d thought of that.
But you know, Walter is uncommunicative and he’s
certainly sullen and ungracious, but I don’t really think
he’s stupid.’
‘So you don’t think it’s Walter?’
‘I think everybody would be very relieved if it was
Walter. That sounds very unkind, but it’s because he
is an outsider.’
‘What about his wife?’ asked Inspector Curry. ‘Would
she be relieved?’
Miss Marple did not answer. She was thinking of
Gina and Stephen Restarick standing together as she
had seen them on her ﬁrst day. And she thought of the
way Alex Restarick’s eyes had gone straight to Gina as
165

q

p

he had entered the Hall last night. What was Gina’s
own attitude?

II
Two hours later Inspector Curry tilted back his chair,
stretched himself and sighed.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘we’ve cleared a good deal of ground.’
Sergeant Lake agreed.
‘The servants are out,’ he said. ‘They were together
all through the critical period – those that sleep here.
The ones that don’t live in had gone home.’
Curry nodded. He was suffering from mental fatigue.
He had interviewed physio-therapists, members of
the teaching staff, and what he called to himself the
‘two young lags,’ whose turn it had been to dine with
the family that night. All their stories dovetailed and
checked. He could write them off. Their activities and
habits were communal. There were no lonely souls
among them. Which was useful for the purposes of
alibis. Curry had kept Dr Maverick, who was, as far
as he could judge, the chief person in charge of the
Institute, to the end.
‘But we’ll have him in now, Lake.’
So the young doctor bustled in, neat and spruce and
rather inhuman looking behind his pince-nez.
166

They do it with Mirrors

Maverick conﬁrmed the statements of his staff,
and agreed with Curry’s ﬁndings. There had been no
slackness, no loophole in the College impregnability.
Christian Gulbrandsen’s death could not be laid to the
account of the ‘young patients,’ as Curry almost called
them, so hypnotized had he become by the fervent
medical atmosphere.
‘But patients are exactly what they are, Inspector,’
said Dr Maverick with a little smile.
It was a superior smile, and Inspector Curry would
not have been human if he had not resented it just a
little.
He said professionally:
‘Now as regards your own movements, Dr Maverick?
Can you give me an account of them?’
‘Certainly. I have jotted them down for you with
approximate times.’
Dr Maverick had left the Great Hall at ﬁfteen minutes after nine, with Mr Lacy and Dr Baumgarten.
They had gone to Dr Baumgarten’s rooms, where
they had all three remained discussing certain courses
of treatment until Miss Bellever had come hurrying in
and asked Dr Maverick to go to the Great Hall. That
was at approximately half-past nine. He had gone at
once to the Hall and had found Edgar Lawson in a
state of collapse.
Inspector Curry stirred a little.
167

p

q

‘Just a minute, Dr Maverick. Is this young man, in
your opinion, deﬁnitely a mental case?’
Dr Maverick smiled the superior smile again.
‘We are all mental cases, Inspector Curry.’
Tomfool answer, thought the Inspector. He knew
quite well he wasn’t a mental case, whatever Dr
Maverick might be!
‘Is he responsible for his actions? He knows what he
is doing, I suppose?’
‘Perfectly.’
‘Then when he ﬁred that revolver at Mr Serrocold
it was deﬁnitely attempted murder.’
‘No, no, Inspector Curry. Nothing of that kind.’
‘Come now, Dr Maverick. I’ve seen the two bullet
holes in the wall. They must have gone dangerously
near to Mr Serrocold’s head.’
‘Perhaps. But Lawson had no intention of killing Mr
Serrocold or even of wounding him. He is very fond of
Mr Serrocold.’
‘It seems a curious way of showing it.’
Dr Maverick smiled again. Inspector Curry found
that smile very trying.
‘Everything one does is intentional. Every time you,
Inspector, forget a name or a face it is because, unconsciously, you wish to forget it.’
Inspector Curry looked unbelieving.
‘Every time you make a slip of the tongue, that slip
168

They do it with Mirrors

has a meaning. Edgar Lawson was standing a few feet
away from Mr Serrocold. He could easily have shot
him dead. Instead, he missed him. Why did he miss
him? Because he wanted to miss him. It is as simple
as that. Mr Serrocold was never in any danger – and
Mr Serrocold himself was quite aware of that fact. He
understood Edgar’s gesture for exactly what it was – a
gesture of deﬁance and resentment against a universe
that has denied him the simple necessities of a child’s
life – security and affection.’
‘I think I’d like to see this young man.’
‘Certainly if you wish. His outburst last night has had
a cathartic effect. There is a great improvement today.
Mr Serrocold will be very pleased.’
Inspector Curry stared hard at him, but Dr Maverick
was serious as always.
Curry sighed.
‘Do you have any arsenic?’ he asked.
‘Arsenic?’ The question took Dr Maverick by surprise. It was clearly unexpected. ‘What a very curious
question. Why arsenic?’
‘Just answer the question, please.’
‘No, I have no arsenic of any kind in my possession.’
‘But you have some drugs?’
‘Oh certainly. Sedatives. Morphia – the barbiturates.
The usual things.’
169

p

q

‘Do you attend Mrs Serrocold?’
‘No. Dr Gunter of Market Kimble is the family
physician. I hold a medical degree, of course, but I
practise purely as a psychiatrist.’
‘I see. Well, thank you very much, Dr Maverick.’
As Dr Maverick went out, Inspector Curry murmured to Lake that psychiatrists gave him a pain in
the neck.
‘We’ll get on to the family now,’ he said. ‘I’ll see
young Walter Hudd ﬁrst.’
Walter Hudd’s attitude was cautious. He seemed
to be studying the police ofﬁcer with a slightly wary
expression. But he was quite co-operative.
There was a good deal of defective wiring in Stonygates
– the whole electric system was very old-fashioned.
They wouldn’t stand for a system like that in the
States.
‘It was installed, I believe, by the late Mr Gulbrandsen
when electric light was a novelty,’ said Inspector Curry
with a faint smile.
‘I’ll say so! Sweet old feudal English and never been
brought up to date.’
The fuse which controlled most of the lights in
the Great Hall had gone, and he had gone out to
the fuse-box to see about it. In due course he got
it repaired and came back.
‘How long were you away?’
170

They do it with Mirrors

‘Why that I couldn’t say for sure. The fuse-box is in
an awkward place. I had to get steps and a candle. I was
maybe ten minutes – perhaps a quarter of an hour.’
‘Did you hear a shot?’
‘Why no, I didn’t hear anything like that. There are
double doors through to the kitchen quarters and one
of them is lined with a kind of felt.’
‘I see. And when you came back into the Hall, what
did you see?’
‘They were all crowded round the door into Mr
Serrocold’s study. Mrs Strete said that Mr Serrocold
had been shot – but actually that wasn’t so. Mr
Serrocold was quite all right. The boob had missed
him.’
‘You recognized the revolver?’
‘Sure I recognized it! It was mine.’
‘When did you see it last?’
‘Two or three days ago.’
‘Where did you keep it?’
‘In the drawer in my room.’
‘Who knew that you kept it there?’
‘I wouldn’t know who knows what in this house.’
‘What do you mean by that, Mr Hudd?’
‘Aw, they’re all nuts!’
‘When you came into the Hall, was everybody else
there?’
‘What d’you mean by everybody?’
171

p

q

‘The same people who were there when you went
to repair the fuse.’
‘Gina was there . . . and the old lady with white hair
– and Miss Bellever . . . I didn’t notice particularly –
but I should say so.’
‘Mr Gulbrandsen arrived quite unexpectedly the day
before yesterday, did he not?’
‘I guess so. It wasn’t his usual routine, I understand.’
‘Did anyone seem upset by his arrival?’
Walter Hudd took a moment or two before he
answered:
‘Why no, I wouldn’t say so.’
Once more there was a touch of caution in his
manner.
‘Have you any idea why he came?’
‘Their precious Gulbrandsen Trust I suppose. The
whole set-up here is crazy.’
‘You have these “set-ups” as you call it, in the
States.’
‘It’s one thing to endow a scheme, and another to
give it the personal touch as they do here. I had enough
of psychiatrists in the Army. This place is stiff with
them. Teaching young thugs to make rafﬁa baskets
and carve pipe-racks. Kids’ games! It’s sissy!’
Inspector Curry did not comment on this criticism.
Possibly he agreed with it.
172

They do it with Mirrors

He said, eying Walter carefully:
‘So you have no idea who could have killed Mr
Gulbrandsen?’
‘One of the bright boys from the College practising
his technique, I’d say.’
‘No, Mr Hudd, that’s out. The College, in spite of
its carefully produced atmosphere of freedom, is none
the less a place of detention and is run on those lines.
Nobody can run in and out of it after dark and commit
murders.’
‘I wouldn’t put it past them! Well – if you want to
ﬁx it nearer home, I’d say your best bet was Alex
Restarick.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘He had the opportunity. He drove up through the
grounds alone in his car.’
‘And why should he kill Christian Gulbrandsen?’
Walter shrugged his shoulders.
‘I’m a stranger. I don’t know the family set-ups.
Maybe the old boy had heard something about Alex
and was going to spill the beans to the Serrocolds.’
‘With what results?’
‘They might cut off the dough. He can use dough –
uses a good deal of it by all accounts.’
‘You mean – in theatrical enterprises?’
‘That’s what he calls it?’
‘Do you suggest it was otherwise?’
173

p

q

Again Walter Hudd shrugged his shoulders.
‘I wouldn’t know,’ he said.

174

Chapter 13

I
Alex Restarick was voluble. He also gestured with
his hands.
‘I know, I know! I’m the ideal suspect. I drive down
here alone and on the way to the house, I get a
creative ﬁt. I can’t expect you to understand. How
should you?’
‘I might,’ Curry put in drily, but Alex Restarick
swept on.
‘It’s just one of those things! They come upon you
there’s no knowing when or how. An effect – an idea
– and everything else goes to the winds! I’m producing
Limehouse Nights next month. Suddenly – last night
– the set-up was wonderful . . . The perfect lighting.
Fog – and the headlights cutting through the fog and
being thrown back – and reﬂecting dimly a tall pile of
buildings. Everything helped! The shots – the running
footsteps – and the chug-chugging of the electric power
175

p

q

engine – could have been a launch on the Thames. And
I thought – that’s it – but what am I going to use to get
just these effects? – and –’
Inspector Curry broke in.
‘You heard shots? Where?’
‘Out of the fog, Inspector.’ Alex waved his hands in
the air – plump well-kept hands. ‘Out of the fog. That
was the wonderful part about it.’
‘It didn’t occur to you that anything was wrong?’
‘Wrong? Why should it?’
‘Are shots such a usual occurrence?’
‘Ah, I knew you wouldn’t understand! The shots
ﬁtted into the scene I was creating. I wanted shots.
Danger – opium – crazy business. What did I care
what they were really? Backﬁres from a lorry on the
road? A poacher after rabbits?’
‘They snare rabbits mostly round here.’
Alex swept on:
‘A child letting off ﬁreworks? I didn’t even think
about them as – shots. I was in Limehouse – or rather
at the back of the stalls – looking at Limehouse.’
‘How many shots?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Alex petulantly. ‘Two or three.
Two close together, I do remember that.’
Inspector Curry nodded.
‘And the sound of running footsteps, I think you
said? Where were they?’
176

They do it with Mirrors

‘They came to me out of the fog. Somewhere near
the house.’
Inspector Curry said gently:
‘That would suggest that the murderer of Christian
Gulbrandsen came from outside.’
‘Of course. Why not? You don’t really suggest, do
you, that he came from inside the house?’
Still very gently Inspector Curry said:
‘We have to think of everything.’
‘I suppose so,’ said Alex Restarick generously. ‘What
a soul-destroying job yours must be, Inspector! The
details, the times and places, the pettifogging pettiness
of it. And in the end – what good is it all? Does it bring
the wretched Christian Gulbrandsen back to life?’
‘There’s quite a satisfaction in getting your man, Mr
Restarick.’
‘The Wild Western touch!’
‘Did you know Mr Gulbrandsen well?’
‘Not well enough to murder him, Inspector. I had
met him, off and on, since I lived here as a boy. He
made brief appearances from time to time. One of our
captains of industry. The type does not interest me.
He has quite a collection, I believe, of Thorwaldsen’s
statuary –’ Alex shuddered. ‘That speaks for itself,
does it not? My God, these rich men!’
Inspector Curry eyed him meditatively. Then he said:
‘Do you take any interest in poisons, Mr Restarick?’
177

p

q

‘In poisons? My dear man, he was surely not poisoned ﬁrst and shot afterwards. That would be too
madly detective story.’
‘He was not poisoned. But you haven’t answered my
question.’
‘Poison has a certain appeal . . . It has not the
crudeness of the revolver bullet or the blunt weapon.
I have no special knowledge of the subject, if that is
what you mean.’
‘Have you ever had arsenic in your possession?’
‘In sandwiches – after the show? The idea has its
allurements. You don’t know Rose Glidon? These
actresses who think they have a name! No I have
never thought of arsenic. One extracts it from weed
killer or ﬂypapers, I believe.’
‘How often are you down here, Mr Restarick?’
‘It varies, Inspector. Sometimes not for several weeks.
But I try to get down for weekends whenever I can. I
always regard Stonygates as my true home.’
‘Mrs Serrocold has encouraged you to do so?’
‘What I owe Mrs Serrocold can never be repaid.
Sympathy, understanding, affection –’
‘And quite a lot of solid cash as well, I believe?’
Alex looked faintly disgusted.
‘She treats me as a son, and she has belief in my
work.’
‘Has she ever spoken to you about her will?’
178

They do it with Mirrors

‘Certainly. But may I ask what is the point of all these
questions, Inspector? There is nothing wrong with Mrs
Serrocold.’
‘There had better not be,’ said Inspector Curry
grimly.
‘Now what can you possibly mean by that?’
‘If you don’t know, so much the better,’ said Inspector Curry. ‘And if you do – I’m warning you.’
When Alex had gone Sergeant Lake said:
‘Pretty bogus, would you say?’
Curry shook his head.
‘Difﬁcult to say. He may have genuine creative
talent. He may just like living soft and talking big.
One doesn’t know. Heard running footsteps, did he?
I’d be prepared to bet he made that up.’
‘For any particular reason?’
‘Deﬁnitely for a particular reason. We haven’t come
to it yet, but we will.’
‘After all, sir, one of those smart lads may have got
out of the College buildings unbeknownst. Probably a
few cat burglars amongst them, and if so –’
‘That’s what we’re meant to think. Very convenient.
But if that’s so, Lake, I’ll eat my new soft hat.’

179

q

p
II

‘I was at the piano,’ said Stephen Restarick. ‘I’d been
strumming softly when the row blew up. Between
Lewis and Edgar.’
‘What did you think of it?’
‘Well – to tell the truth I didn’t really take it seriously.
The poor beggar has these ﬁts of venom. He’s not
really loopy, you know. All this nonsense is a kind of
blowing off steam. The truth is, we all get under his
skin – particularly Gina, of course.’
‘Gina? You mean Mrs Hudd? Why does she get
under his skin?’
‘Because she’s a woman – and a very beautiful woman,
and because she thinks he’s funny! She’s half Italian, you
know, and the Italians have that unconscious vein of
cruelty. They’ve no compassion for anyone who’s old
or ugly, or peculiar in any way. They point with their
ﬁngers and jeer. That’s what Gina did, metaphorically
speaking. She’d no use for young Edgar. He was ridiculous, pompous, and at bottom fundamentally unsure of
himself. He wanted to impress, and he only succeeded in
looking silly. It wouldn’t mean anything to her that the
poor fellow suffered a lot.’
‘Are you suggesting that Edgar Lawson is in love
with Mrs Hudd?’ asked Inspector Curry.
180

They do it with Mirrors

Stephen replied cheerfully:
‘Oh yes. As a matter of fact we all are, more or less!
She likes us that way.’
‘Does her husband like it?’
‘He takes a dim view. He suffers, too, poor fellow.
The thing can’t last, you know. Their marriage, I mean.
It will break up before long. It was just one of these war
affairs.’
‘This is all very interesting,’ said the Inspector. ‘But
we’re getting away from our subject, which is the
murder of Christian Gulbrandsen.’
‘Quite,’ said Stephen. ‘But I can’t tell you anything
about it. I sat at the piano, and I didn’t leave the piano
until dear Jolly came in with some rusty old keys and
tried to ﬁt one to the lock of the study door.’
‘You stayed at the piano. Did you continue to play
the piano?’
‘A gentle obbligato to the life and death struggle in
Lewis’s study? No, I stopped playing when the tempo
rose. Not that I had any doubts as to the outcome.
Lewis has what I can only describe as a dynamic
eye. He could easily break up Edgar just by looking
at him.’
‘Yet Edgar Lawson ﬁred two shots at him.’
Stephen shook his head gently.
‘Just putting on an act, that was. Enjoying himself.
My dear mother used to do it. She died or ran away
181

p

q

with someone when I was four, but I remember her
blazing off with a pistol if anything upset her. She did
it at a night club once. Made a pattern on the wall.
She was an excellent shot. Quite a bit of trouble she
caused. She was a Russian dancer, you know.’
‘Indeed. Can you tell me, Mr Restarick, who left the
Hall yesterday evening whilst you were there – during
the relevant time?’
‘Wally – to ﬁx the lights. Juliet Bellever to ﬁnd
a key to ﬁt the study door. Nobody else, as far as
I know.’
‘Would you have noticed if somebody did?’
Stephen considered.
‘Probably not. That is, if they just tiptoed out and
back again. It was so dark in the Hall – and there was
the ﬁght to which we were all listening avidly.’
‘Is there anyone you are sure was there the whole
time?’
‘Mrs Serrocold – yes, and Gina. I’d swear to them.’
‘Thank you, Mr Restarick.’
Stephen went towards the door. Then he hesitated
and came back.
‘What’s all this,’ he said, ‘about arsenic?’
‘Who mentioned arsenic to you?’
‘My brother.’
‘Ah – yes.’
Stephen said:
182

They do it with Mirrors

‘Has somebody been giving Mrs Serrocold arsenic?’
‘Why should you mention Mrs Serrocold?’
‘I’ve read of the symptoms of arsenical poisoning.
Peripheral neuritis, isn’t it? It would square more or
less with what she’s been suffering from lately. And
then Lewis snatching away her tonic last night. Is that
what’s been going on here?’
‘The matter is under investigation,’ said Inspector
Curry in his most ofﬁcial manner.
‘Does she know about it herself ?’
‘Mr Serrocold was particularly anxious that she
should not be – alarmed.’
‘Alarmed isn’t the right word, Inspector. Mrs Serrocold
is never alarmed . . . Is that what lies behind Christian
Gulbrandsen’s death? Did he ﬁnd out she was being
poisoned – but how could he ﬁnd out? Anyway,
the whole thing seems most improbable. It doesn’t
make sense.’
‘It surprises you very much, does it, Mr Restarick?’
‘Yes, indeed. When Alex spoke to me I could hardly
believe it.’
‘Who, in your opinion, would be likely to administer
arsenic to Mrs Serrocold?’
For a moment a grin appeared upon Stephen
Restarick’s handsome face.
‘Not the usual person. You can wash out the husband. Lewis Serrocold’s got nothing to gain. And also
183

p

q

he worships that woman. He can’t bear her to have an
ache in her little ﬁnger.’
‘Who then? Have you any idea?’
‘Oh yes. I’d say it was a certainty.’
‘Explain, please.’
Stephen shook his head.
‘It’s a certainty psychologically speaking. Not in any
other way. No evidence of any kind. And you probably
wouldn’t agree.’
Stephen Restarick went out nonchalantly, and Inspector Curry drew cats on the sheet of paper in front
of him.
He was thinking three things. A, that Stephen Restarick
thought a good deal of himself; B, that Stephen
Restarick and his brother presented a united front;
and C, that Stephen Restarick was a handsome man
where Walter Hudd was a plain one.
He wondered about two other things – what Stephen
meant by ‘psychologically speaking’ and whether Stephen
could possibly have seen Gina from his seat at the
piano. He rather thought not.

184

They do it with Mirrors

III
Into the Gothic gloom of the library, Gina brought an
exotic glow. Even Inspector Curry blinked a little at the
radiant young woman who sat down, leaned forward
over the table and said expectantly, ‘Well?’
Inspector Curry, observing her scarlet shirt and dark
green slacks, said drily:
‘I see you’re not wearing mourning, Mrs Hudd?’
‘I haven’t got any,’ said Gina. ‘I know everyone is
supposed to have a little black number and wear it
with pearls. But I don’t. I hate black. I think it’s
hideous, and only receptionists and housekeepers and
people like that ought to wear it. Anyway Christian
Gulbrandsen wasn’t really a relation. He’s my grandmother’s stepson.’
‘And I suppose you didn’t know him very well?’
Gina shook her head.
‘He came here three or four times when I was a child,
but then in the war I went to America, and I only came
back here to live about six months ago.’
‘You have deﬁnitely come back here to live? You’re
not just on a visit?’
‘I haven’t really thought,’ said Gina.
‘You were in the Great Hall last night, when Mr
Gulbrandsen went to his room?’
185

p

q

‘Yes. He said goodnight and went away. Grandam
asked if he had everything he wanted and he said yes –
that Jolly had ﬁxed him up ﬁne. Not those words, but
that kind of thing. He said he had letters to write.’
‘And then?’
Gina described the scene between Lewis and Edgar
Lawson. It was the same story that Inspector Curry
had by now heard many times, but it took an added
colour, a new gusto, under Gina’s handling. It became
drama.
‘It was Wally’s revolver,’ she said. ‘Fancy Edgar’s
having the guts to go and pinch it out of his room.
I’d never have believed he’d have the guts.’
‘Were you alarmed when they went into the study
and Edgar Lawson locked the door?’
‘Oh no,’ said Gina, opening her enormous brown
eyes very wide. ‘I loved it. It was so ham, you know,
and so madly theatrical. Everything Edgar does is
always ridiculous. One can’t take him seriously for a
moment.’
‘He did ﬁre the revolver, though?’
‘Yes. We all thought then that he’d shot Lewis
after all.’
‘And did you enjoy that?’ Inspector Curry could not
refrain from asking.
‘Oh no, I was terriﬁed, then. Everyone was, except
Grandam. She never turned a hair.’
186

They do it with Mirrors

‘That seems rather remarkable.’
‘Not really. She’s that kind of person. Not quite in
this world. She’s the sort of person who never believes
anything bad can happen. She’s sweet.’
‘During all this scene, who was in the Hall?’
‘Oh we were all there. Except Uncle Christian, of
course.’
‘Not all, Mrs Hudd. People went in and out.’
‘Did they?’ asked Gina vaguely.
‘Your husband, for instance, went out to ﬁx the
lights.’
‘Yes. Wally’s great at ﬁxing things.’
‘During his absence, a shot was heard, I understand.
A shot that you all thought came from the Park?’
‘I don’t remember that . . . Oh yes, it was just
after the lights had come on again and Wally had
come back.’
‘Did anyone else leave the Hall?’
‘I don’t think so. I don’t remember.’
‘Where were you sitting, Mrs Hudd?’
‘Over by the window.’
‘Near the door to the library?’
‘Yes.’
‘Did you yourself leave the Hall at all?’
‘Leave? With all the excitement? Of course not.’
Gina sounded scandalized by the idea.
‘Where were the others sitting?’
187

p

q

‘Mostly round the ﬁreplace, I think. Aunt Mildred
was knitting and so was Aunt Jane – Miss Marple, I
mean – Grandam was just sitting.’
‘And Mr Stephen Restarick?’
‘Stephen? He was playing the piano to begin with. I
don’t know where he went later.’
‘And Miss Bellever?’
‘Fussing about, as usual. She practically never sits
down. She was looking for keys or something.’
She said suddenly:
‘What’s all this about Grandam’s tonic? Did the
chemist make a mistake in making it up or something?’
‘Why should you think that?’
‘Because the bottle’s disappeared, and Jolly’s been
fussing round madly looking for it, in no end of a stew.
Alex told her the police had taken it away. Did you?’
Instead of replying to the question, Inspector Curry
said:
‘Miss Bellever was upset, you say?’
‘Oh! Jolly always fusses,’ said Gina carelessly. ‘She
likes fussing. Sometimes I wonder how Grandam can
stand it.’
‘Just one last question, Mrs Hudd. You’ve no ideas
yourself as to who killed Christian Gulbrandsen and
why?’
‘One of the queers did it, I should think. The thug
188

They do it with Mirrors

ones are really quite sensible. I mean they only cosh
people so as to rob a till or get money or jewellery –
not just for fun. But one of the queers – you know, what
they call mentally maladjusted – might do it for fun,
don’t you think? Because I can’t see what other reason
there could be for killing Uncle Christian except fun,
do you? At least I don’t mean fun, exactly – but –’
‘You can’t think of a motive?’
‘Yes, that’s what I mean,’ said Gina gratefully. ‘He
wasn’t robbed or anything, was he?’
‘But you know, Mrs Hudd, the College buildings
were locked and barred. Nobody could get out from
there without a pass.’
‘Don’t you believe it,’ Gina laughed merrily. ‘Those
boys could get out from anywhere! They’ve taught me
a lot of tricks.’
‘She’s a lively one,’ said Lake when Gina had
departed. ‘First time I’ve seen her close to. Lovely
ﬁgure, hasn’t she. Sort of a foreign ﬁgure, if you know
what I mean.’
Inspector Curry threw him a cold glance. Sergeant
Lake said hastily that she was a merry one. ‘Seems to
have enjoyed it all, as you might say.’
‘Whether Stephen Restarick is right or not about her
marriage breaking up, I notice that she went out of her
way to mention that Walter Hudd was back in the Great
Hall before that shot was heard.’
189

p

q

‘Which, according to everyone else, isn’t so?’
‘Exactly.’
‘She didn’t mention Miss Bellever leaving the Hall
to look for keys, either.’
‘No,’ said the Inspector thoughtfully, ‘she didn’t . . .’

190

Chapter 14

I
Mrs Strete ﬁtted into the library very much better than
Gina Hudd had done. There was nothing exotic about
Mrs Strete. She wore black with an onyx brooch, and
she wore a hairnet over carefully arranged grey hair.
She looked, Inspector Curry reﬂected, exactly as the
relict of a Canon of the Established Church should look
– which was almost odd, because so few people ever did
look like what they really were.
Even the tight line of her lips had an ascetic ecclesiastical ﬂavour. She expressed Christian Endurance, and
possibly Christian Fortitude. But not, Curry thought,
Christian Charity.
Moreover it was clear that Mrs Strete was offended.
‘I should have thought that you could have given
me some idea of when you would want me, Inspector. I have been forced to sit around waiting all the
morning.’
191

p

q

It was, Curry judged, her sense of importance that
was hurt. He hastened to pour oil on the troubled
waters.
‘I’m very sorry, Mrs Strete. Perhaps you don’t quite
know how we set about these things. We start, you
know, with the less important evidence – get it out
of the way, so to speak. It’s valuable to keep to the
last a person on whose judgment we can rely – a good
observer – by whom we can check what has been told
us up to date.’
Mrs Strete softened visibly.
‘Oh I see. I hadn’t quite realized . . .’
‘Now you’re a woman of mature judgment, Mrs
Strete. A woman of the world. And then this is your
home – you’re the daughter of the house, and you can
tell me all about the people who are in it.’
‘I can certainly do that,’ said Mildred Strete.
‘So you see that when we come to the question of
who killed Christian Gulbrandsen, you can help us a
great deal.’
‘But is there any question? Isn’t it perfectly obvious
who killed my brother?’
Inspector Curry leant back in his chair. His hand
stroked his small neat moustache.
‘Well – we have to be careful,’ he said. ‘You think
it’s obvious?’
‘Of course. That dreadful American husband of
192

They do it with Mirrors

poor Gina’s. He’s the only stranger here. We know
absolutely nothing about him. He’s probably one of
these dreadful American gangsters.’
‘But that wouldn’t quite account for his killing
Christian Gulbrandsen, would it? Why should he?’
‘Because Christian had found out something about
him. That’s what he came here for so soon after his
last visit.’
‘Are you sure of that, Mrs Strete?’
‘Again it seems to me quite obvious. He let it be
thought his visit was in connection with the Trust –
but that’s nonsense. He was here for that only a month
ago. And nothing of importance has arisen since. So
he must have come on some private business. He saw
Walter on his last visit, and he may have recognized
him – or perhaps made inquiries about him in the
States – naturally he has agents all over the world
– and found out something really damaging. Gina is
a very silly girl. She always has been. It is just like
her to marry a man she knows nothing about – she’s
always been man mad! A man wanted by the police,
perhaps, or a man who’s already married, or some bad
character in the underworld. But my brother Christian
wasn’t an easy man to deceive. He came here, I’m
sure, to settle the whole business. Expose Walter and
show him up for what he is. And so, naturally, Walter
shot him.’
193

p

q

Inspector Curry, adding some out-sized whiskers to
one of the cats on his blotting pad, said:
‘Ye – es.’
‘Don’t you agree with me that that’s what must have
happened?’
‘It could be – yes,’ admitted the Inspector.
‘What other solution could there be? Christian had
no enemies. What I can’t understand is why you haven’t
already arrested Walter?’
‘Well, you see, Mrs Strete, we have to have evidence.’
‘You could probably get that easily enough. If you
wired to America –’
‘Oh yes, we shall check up on Mr Walter Hudd.
You can be sure of that. But until we can prove
motive, there’s not very much to go upon. There’s
opportunity, of course –’
‘He went out just after Christian, pretending the
lights had fused –’
‘They did fuse.’
‘He could easily arrange that.’
‘True.’
‘That gave him his excuse. He followed Christian
to his room, shot him and then repaired the fuse and
came back to the Hall.’
‘His wife says he came back before you heard the
shot from outside.’
194

They do it with Mirrors

‘Not a bit of it! Gina would say anything. The Italians
are never truthful. And she’s a Roman Catholic, of
course.’
Inspector Curry side-stepped the ecclesiastical angle.
‘You think his wife was in it with him?’
Mildred Strete hesitated for a moment.
‘No – no, I don’t think that.’ She seemed rather
disappointed not to think so. She went on: ‘That
must have been partly the motive – to prevent Gina’s
learning the truth about him. After all, Gina is his bread
and butter.’
‘And a very beautiful girl.’
‘Oh yes. I’ve always said Gina is good looking. A
very common type in Italy, of course. But if you ask
me, it’s money that Walter Hudd is after. That’s why
he came over here and has settled down living on the
Serrocolds.’
‘Mrs Hudd is very well off, I understand?’
‘Not at present. My father settled the same sum on
Gina’s mother as he did on me. But of course she
took her husband’s nationality (I believe the law is
altered now) and what with the war and his being a
Fascist, Gina has very little of her own. My mother
spoils her, and her American aunt, Mrs Van Rydock,
spent fabulous sums on her and bought her everything
she wanted during the war years. Nevertheless, from
Walter’s point of view, he can’t lay his hands on much
195

p

q

until my mother’s death, when a very large fortune will
come to Gina.’
‘And to you, Mrs Strete.’
A faint colour came into Mildred Strete’s cheek.
‘And to me, as you say. My husband and myself
always lived quietly. He spent very little money except
on books – he was a great scholar. My own money has
almost doubled itself. It is more than enough for my
simple needs. Still one can always use money for the
beneﬁt of others. Any money that comes to me, I shall
regard as a sacred trust.’
‘But it won’t be in a Trust, will it?’ said Curry,
wilfully misunderstanding. ‘It will come to you absolutely.’
‘Oh yes – in that sense. Yes, it will be mine absolutely.’
Something in the ring of that last word made Inspector Curry raise his head sharply. Mrs Strete was not
looking at him. Her eyes were shining, and her long
thin mouth was curved in a triumphant smile.
Inspector said in a considering voice:
‘So in your view – and of course you’ve had ample
opportunities of judging – Master Walter Hudd wants
the money that will come to his wife when Mrs
Serrocold dies. By the way, she’s not very strong, is
she, Mrs Strete?’
‘My mother has always been delicate.’
196

They do it with Mirrors

‘Quite so. But delicate people often live as long or
longer than people who have robust health.’
‘Yes, I suppose they do.’
‘You haven’t noticed your mother’s health failing
just lately?’
‘She suffers from rheumatism. But then one must
have something as one grows older. I’ve no sympathy
with people who make a fuss over inevitable aches
and pains.’
‘Does Mrs Serrocold make a fuss?’
Mildred Strete was silent for a moment. She said at
last:
‘She does not make a fuss herself, but she is used to
being made a fuss of. My stepfather is far too solicitous.
And as for Miss Bellever, she makes herself positively
ridiculous. In any case, Miss Bellever has had a very
bad inﬂuence in this house. She came here many years
ago, and her devotion to my mother, though admirable
in itself, has really become somewhat of an inﬂiction.
She literally tyrannizes over my mother. She runs the
whole house and takes far too much upon herself. I
think it annoys Lewis sometimes. I should never be
surprised if he told her to go. She has no tact – no
tact whatever, and it is trying for a man to ﬁnd his
wife completely dominated by a bossy woman.’
Inspector Curry nodded his head gently.
‘I see . . . I see . . .’
197

p

q

He watched her speculatively.
‘There’s one thing I don’t quite get, Mrs Strete. The
position of the two Restarick brothers?’
‘More foolish sentiment. Their father married my
poor mother for her money. Two years afterwards
he ran away with a Jugoslavian singer of the lowest
morals. He was a very unworthy person. My mother
was soft-hearted enough to be sorry for these two boys.
Since it was out of the question for them to spend their
holidays with a woman of such notorious morals, she
more or less adopted them. They have been hangers-on
here ever since. Oh yes, we’ve plenty of spongers in this
house, I can tell you that.’
‘Alex Restarick had an opportunity of killing Christian Gulbrandsen. He was in his car alone – driving
from the Lodge to the house – what about Stephen?’
‘Stephen was in the Hall with us. I don’t approve of
Alex Restarick – he is getting to look very coarse, and
I imagine he leads an irregular life – but I don’t really
see him as a murderer. Besides, why should he kill my
brother?’
‘That’s what we always come back to, isn’t it?’
said Inspector Curry genially. ‘What did Christian
Gulbrandsen know – about someone – that made it
necessary for that someone to kill him?’
‘Exactly,’ said Mrs Strete triumphantly. ‘It must be
Walter Hudd.’
198

They do it with Mirrors

‘Unless it’s someone nearer home.’
Mildred said sharply:
‘What did you mean by that?’
Inspector Curry said slowly:
‘Mr Gulbrandsen seemed very concerned about Mrs
Serrocold’s health whilst he was here.’
Mrs Strete frowned.
‘Men always fuss over mother because she looks
fragile. I think she likes them to! Or else Christian had
been listening to Juliet Bellever.’
‘You’re not worried about your mother’s health
yourself, Mrs Strete?’
‘No. I hope I’m sensible. Naturally mother is not
young –’
‘And death comes to all of us,’ said Inspector Curry.
‘But not ahead of its appointed time. That’s what we
have to prevent.’
He spoke meaningly. Mildred Strete ﬂared into sudden animation.
‘Oh it’s wicked – wicked. No one else here really
seems to care. Why should they? I’m the only person
who was a blood relation to Christian. To mother, he
was only a grown-up stepson. To Gina, he isn’t really
any relation at all. But he was my own brother.’
‘Half-brother,’ suggested Inspector Curry.
‘Half-brother, yes. But we were both Gulbrandsens
in spite of the difference in age.’
199

p

q

Curry said gently:
‘Yes – yes, I see your point . . .’
Tears in her eyes, Mildred Strete marched out.
Curry looked at Lake.
‘So she’s quite sure it’s Walter Hudd,’ he said.
‘Won’t entertain for a moment the idea of its being
anybody else.’
‘And she may be right.’
‘She certainly may. Wally ﬁts. Opportunity – and
motive. Because if he wants money quick, his wife’s
mother would have to die. So Wally tampers with
her tonic, and Christian Gulbrandsen sees him do
it – or hears about it in some way. Yes, it ﬁts very
nicely.’
He paused and said:
‘By the way, Mildred Strete likes money . . . She
mayn’t spend it, but she likes it. I’m not sure why . . .
She may be a miser – with a miser’s passion. Or
she may like the power that money gives. Money for
benevolence, perhaps? She’s a Gulbrandsen. She may
want to emulate Father.’
‘Complex, isn’t it?’ said Sergeant Lake, and scratched
his head.
Inspector Curry said:
‘We’d better see this screwy young man Lawson,
and after that we’ll go to the Great Hall and work out
who was where – and if – and why – and when . . .
200

They do it with Mirrors

We’ve heard one or two rather interesting things this
morning.’

II
It was very difﬁcult, Inspector Curry thought, to get a
true estimate of someone from what other people said.
Edgar Lawson had been described by a good many
different people that morning, but looking at him
now, Curry’s own impressions were almost ludicrously
different.
Edgar did not impress him as ‘queer’ or ‘dangerous,’
or ‘arrogant’ or even as ‘abnormal.’ He seemed a very
ordinary young man, very much cast down and in a
state of humility approaching that of Uriah Heep’s. He
looked young and slightly common and rather pathetic.
He was only too anxious to talk and to apologize.
‘I know I’ve done very wrong. I don’t know what
came over me – really I don’t. Making that scene and
kicking up such a row. And actually shooting off a
pistol. At Mr Serrocold too, who’s been so good to
me and so patient, too.’
He twisted his hands nervously. They were rather
pathetic hands, with bony wrists.
‘If I’ve got to be had up for it, I’ll come with you at
once. I deserve it. I’ll plead guilty.’
201

p

q

‘No charge has been made against you,’ said Inspector Curry crisply. ‘So we’ve no evidence on which to
act. According to Mr Serrocold, letting off the pistol
was an accident.’
‘That’s because he’s so good. There never was a
man as good as Mr Serrocold! He’s done everything
for me. And I go and repay him by acting like this.’
‘What made you act as you did?’
Edgar looked embarrassed.
‘I made a fool of myself.’
Inspector Curry said drily:
‘So it seems. You told Mr Serrocold in the presence
of witnesses that you had discovered that he was your
father. Was that true?’
‘No, it wasn’t.’
‘What put that idea into your head? Did someone
suggest it to you?’
‘Well, it’s a bit hard to explain.’
Inspector Curry looked at him thoughtfully, then
said in a kindly voice:
‘Suppose you try. We don’t want to make things hard
for you.’
‘Well, you see, I had a rather hard time of it as a
kid. The other boys jeered at me. Because I hadn’t
got a father. Said I was a little bastard – which I was,
of course. Mum was usually drunk and she had men
coming in all the time. My father was a foreign seaman,
202

They do it with Mirrors

I believe. The house was always ﬁlthy, and it was all
pretty fair hell. And then I got to thinking, supposing
my Dad had been not just some foreign sailor, but
someone important – and I used to make up a thing
or two. Kid stuff ﬁrst – changed at birth – really the
rightful heir – that sort of thing. And then I went to a
new school and I tried it on once or twice hinting things.
Said my father was really an Admiral in the Navy. I got
to believing it myself. I didn’t feel so bad then.’
He paused and then went on:
‘And then – later – I thought up some other ideas.
I used to stay at hotels and told a lot of silly stories
about being a ﬁghter pilot – or about being in Military
Intelligence. I got all sort of mixed up. I didn’t seem
able to stop telling lies.
‘Only I didn’t really try to get money by it. It was
just swank so as to make people think a bit more of
me. I didn’t want to be dishonest. Mr Serrocold will
tell you – and Dr Maverick – they’ve got all the stuff
about it.’
Inspector Curry nodded. He had already studied
Edgar’s case history and his police record.
‘Mr Serrocold got me clear in the end and brought
me down here. He said he needed a secretary to help
him – and I did help him! I really did. Only the others
laughed at me. They were always laughing at me.’
‘What others? Mrs Serrocold?’
203

p

q

‘No, not Mrs Serrocold. She’s a lady – she’s always
gentle and kind. No, but Gina treated me like dirt. And
Stephen Restarick. And Mrs Strete looked down on me
for not being a gentleman. So did Miss Bellever – and
what’s she? She’s a paid companion, isn’t she?’
Curry noted the signs of rising excitement.
‘So you didn’t ﬁnd them very sympathetic?’
Edgar said passionately:
‘It was because of me being a bastard. If I’d had a
proper father they wouldn’t have gone on like that.’
‘So you appropriated a couple of famous fathers?’
Edgar blushed.
‘I always seem to get to telling lies,’ he muttered.
‘And ﬁnally you said Mr Serrocold was your father.
Why?’
‘Because that would stop them once and for all,
wouldn’t it? If he was my father they couldn’t do
anything to me.’
‘Yes. But you accused him of being your enemy –
of persecuting you.’
‘I know –’ He rubbed his forehead. ‘I got things all
wrong. There are times when I don’t – when I don’t
get things quite right. I get muddled.’
‘And you took the revolver from Mr Walter Hudd’s
room?’
Edgar looked puzzled.
‘Did I? Is that where I got it?’
204

They do it with Mirrors

‘Don’t you remember where you got it?’
Edgar said:
‘I meant to threaten Mr Serrocold with it. I meant
to frighten him. It was kid stuff all over again.’
Inspector Curry said patiently:
‘How did you get the revolver?’
‘You just said – out of Walter’s room.’
‘You remember doing that now?’
‘I must have got it from his room. I couldn’t have
got hold of it any other way, could I?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Inspector Curry. ‘Somebody –
might have given it to you?’
Edgar was silent – his face a blank.
‘Is that how it happened?’
Edgar said passionately:
‘I don’t remember. I was so worked up. I walked
about the garden in a red mist of rage. I thought people
were spying on me, watching me, trying to hound me
down. Even that nice white-haired old lady . . . I can’t
understand it all now. I feel I must have been mad.
I don’t remember where I was and what I was doing
half the time!’
‘Surely you remember who told you Mr Serrocold
was your father?’
Edgar gave the same blank stare.
‘Nobody told me,’ he said sullenly. ‘It just came
to me.’
205

q

p

Inspector Curry sighed. He was not satisﬁed. But he
judged he could make no further progress at present.
‘Well, watch your step in future,’ he said.
‘Yes, sir. Yes indeed I will.’
As Edgar went, Inspector Curry slowly shook his
head.
‘These pathological cases are the devil!’
‘D’you think he’s mad, sir?’
‘Much less mad than I’d imagined. Weak-headed,
boastful, a liar – yet a certain pleasant simplicity about
him. Highly suggestible I should imagine . . .’
‘You think someone did suggest things to him?’
‘Oh yes, old Miss Marple was right there. She’s a
shrewd old bird. But I wish I knew who it was. He won’t
tell. If we only knew that . . . Come on, Lake, let’s have
a thorough reconstruction of the scene in the Hall.’

III
‘That ﬁxes it pretty well.’
Inspector Curry was sitting at the piano. Sergeant
Lake was in a chair by the window overlooking the
lake.
Curry went on:
‘If I’m half-turned on the piano stool, watching the
study door, I can’t see you.’
206

They do it with Mirrors

Sergeant Lake rose softly and edged quietly through
the door to the library.
‘All this side of the room was dark. The only lights
that were on were the ones beside the study door. No,
Lake, I didn’t see you go. Once in the library, you
could go out through the other door to the corridor
– two minutes to run along to the oak suite, shoot
Gulbrandsen and come back through the library to
your chair by the window.
‘The women by the ﬁre have their backs to you.
Mrs Serrocold was sitting here – on the right of the
ﬁreplace, near the study door. Everyone agrees she
didn’t move and she’s the only one who’s in the line
of direct vision. Miss Marple was here. She was looking
past Mrs Serrocold to the study. Mrs Strete was on the
left of the ﬁreplace – close to the door out of the Hall
to the lobby, and it’s a very dark corner. She could have
gone and come back. Yes, it’s possible.’
Curry grinned suddenly.
‘And I could go.’ He slipped off the music stool and
sidled along the wall and out through the door. ‘The
only person who might notice I wasn’t still at the piano
would be Gina Hudd. And you remember what Gina
said: “Stephen was at the piano to begin with. I don’t
know where he was later.”’
‘So you think it’s Stephen?’
‘I don’t know who it is,’ said Curry. ‘It wasn’t
207

p

q

Edgar Lawson or Lewis Serrocold or Mrs Serrocold
or Miss Jane Marple. But for the rest –’ He sighed.
‘It’s probably the American. Those fused lights were a
bit too convenient – a coincidence. And yet, you know,
I rather like the chap. Still, that isn’t evidence.’
He peered thoughtfully at some music on the side
of the piano. ‘Hindemith? Who’s he? Never heard of
him. Shostakovitch! What names these people have.’
He got up and then looked down at the old-fashioned
music stool. He lifted the top of it.
‘Here’s the old-fashioned stuff. Handel’s Largo,
Czerny’s Exercises. Dates back to old Gulbrandsen,
most of this. “I know a lovely Garden” – Vicar’s wife
used to sing that when I was a boy –’
He stopped – the yellow pages of the song in his
hand. Beneath them, reposing on Chopin’s Preludes,
was a small automatic pistol.
‘Stephen Restarick,’ exclaimed Sergeant Lake joyfully.
‘Now don’t jump to conclusions,’ Inspector Curry
warned him. ‘Ten to one that’s what we’re meant
to think.’

208

Chapter 15

I
Miss Marple climbed the stairs and tapped on the door
of Mrs Serrocold’s bedroom.
‘May I come in, Carrie Louise?’
‘Of course, Jane dear.’
Carrie Louise was sitting in front of the dressing
table, brushing her silvery hair. She turned her head
over her shoulder.
‘Is it the police? I’ll be ready in a few minutes.’
‘Are you all right?’
‘Yes, of course. Jolly insisted on my having my
breakfast in bed. And Gina came into the room with
it on tiptoe as though I might be at death’s door! I
don’t think people realize that tragedies like Christian’s
death are much less shock to someone old. Because
one knows by then how anything may happen – and
how little anything really matters that happens in this
world.’
209

p

q

‘Ye – es,’ said Miss Marple dubiously.
‘Don’t you feel the same, Jane? I should have thought
you would.’
Miss Marple said slowly:
‘Christian was murdered.’
‘Yes . . . I see what you mean. You think that does
matter?’
‘Don’t you?’
‘Not to Christian,’ said Carrie Louise simply. ‘It
matters, of course, to whoever murdered him.’
‘Have you any idea who murdered him?’
Mrs Serrocold shook her head in a bewildered fashion.
‘No, I’ve absolutely no idea. I can’t even think of
a reason. It must have been something to do with his
being here before – just over a month ago. Because
otherwise I don’t think he would have come here
suddenly again for no particular reason. Whatever it
was must have started off then. I’ve thought and I’ve
thought, but I can’t remember anything unusual.’
‘Oh! The same people who are here now – yes, Alex
was down from London about then. And – oh yes, Ruth
was here.’
‘Ruth?’
‘Her usual ﬂying visit.’
‘Ruth,’ said Miss Marple again. Her mind was active.
Christian Gulbrandsen and Ruth? Ruth had come away
210

They do it with Mirrors

worried and apprehensive, but had not known why.
Something was wrong was all that Ruth could say.
Christian Gulbrandsen had known or suspected something that Ruth did not. He had known or suspected
that someone was trying to poison Carrie Louise. How
had Christian Gulbrandsen come to entertain those
suspicions? What had he seen or heard? Was it something that Ruth also had seen or heard but which she
had failed to appreciate at its rightful signiﬁcance? Miss
Marple wished that she knew what it could possibly
have been. Her own vague hunch that it (whatever it
was) had to do with Edgar Lawson seemed unlikely
since Ruth had not mentioned him.
She sighed.
‘You’re all keeping something from me, aren’t you?’
asked Carrie Louise.
Miss Marple jumped a little as the quiet voice spoke.
‘Why do you say that?’
‘Because you are. Not Jolly. But everyone else. Even
Lewis. He came in while I was having my breakfast,
and he acted very oddly. He drank some of my coffee
and even had a bit of toast and marmalade. That’s so
unlike him, because he always has tea and he doesn’t
like marmalade, so he must have been thinking of
something else – and I suppose he must have forgotten
to have his own breakfast. He does forget things like
meals, and he looked so concerned and preoccupied.’
211

p

q

‘Murder –’ began Miss Marple.
Carrie Louise said quickly:
‘Oh I know. It’s a terrible thing. I’ve never been
mixed up in it before. You have, haven’t you, Jane?’
‘Well – yes – actually I have,’ Miss Marple admitted.
‘So Ruth told me.’
‘Did she tell you that last time she was down here?’
asked Miss Marple curiously.
‘No, I don’t think it was then. I can’t really remember.’
Carrie Louise spoke vaguely, almost absent-mindedly.
‘What are you thinking about, Carrie Louise?’
Mrs Serrocold smiled and seemed to come back from
a long way away.
‘I was thinking of Gina,’ she said. ‘And of what
you said about Stephen Restarick. Gina’s a dear girl,
you know, and she does really love Wally. I’m sure
she does.’
Miss Marple said nothing.
‘Girls like Gina like to kick up their heels a bit.’ Mrs
Serrocold spoke in an almost pleading voice. ‘They’re
young and they like to feel their power. It’s natural,
really. I know Wally Hudd isn’t the sort of man we
imagined Gina marrying. Normally she’d never have
met him. But she did meet him, and fell in love with him
– and presumably she knows her own business best.’
212

They do it with Mirrors

‘Probably she does,’ said Miss Marple.
‘But it’s so very important that Gina should be
happy.’
Miss Marple looked curiously at her friend.
‘It’s important, I suppose, that everyone should be
happy.’
‘Oh yes. But Gina’s a very special case. When we
took her mother – when we took Pippa – we felt that
it was an experiment that had simply got to succeed.
You see, Pippa’s mother –’
Carrie Louise paused.
Miss Marple said:
‘Who was Pippa’s mother?’
Carrie Louise said: ‘Eric and I agreed that we should
never tell anybody that. She never knew herself.’
‘I’d like to know,’ said Miss Marple.
Mrs Serrocold looked at her doubtfully.
‘It isn’t just curiosity,’ said Miss Marple. ‘I really
– well – need to know. I can hold my tongue, you
know.’
‘You could always keep a secret, Jane,’ said Carrie
Louise with a reminiscent smile. ‘Dr Galbraith – he’s
the Bishop of Cromer now – he knows. But no one
else. Pippa’s mother was Katherine Elsworth.’
‘Elsworth? Wasn’t that the woman who administered
arsenic to her husband? Rather a celebrated case.’
‘Yes.’
213

q

p

‘She was hanged?’
‘Yes. But you know it’s not at all sure that she did
it. The husband was an arsenic eater – they didn’t
understand so much about those things then.’
‘She soaked ﬂypapers.’
‘The maid’s evidence, we always thought, was deﬁnitely malicious.’
‘And Pippa was her daughter?’
‘Yes. Eric and I determined to give the child a fresh
start in life – with love and care and all the things a
child needs. We succeeded. Pippa was – herself. The
sweetest, happiest creature imaginable.’
Miss Marple was silent a long time.
Carrie Louise turned away from the dressing table.
‘I’m ready now. Perhaps you’ll ask the Inspector or
whatever he is to come up to my sitting-room. He won’t
mind, I’m sure.’

II
Inspector Curry did not mind. In fact he rather welcomed the chance of seeing Mrs Serrocold on her own
territory.
As he stood there waiting for her, he looked round
him curiously. It was not his idea of what he termed
to himself ‘a rich woman’s boudoir.’
214

They do it with Mirrors

It had an old-fashioned couch and some rather
uncomfortable looking Victorian chairs with twisted
woodwork backs. The chintzes were old and faded but
of an attractive pattern displaying the Crystal Palace.
It was one of the smaller rooms, though even then
it was larger than the drawing-room of most modern
houses. But it had a cosy rather crowded appearance
with its little tables, its bric-à-brac, and its photographs.
Curry looked at an old snapshot of two little girls, one
dark and lively, the other plain and staring out sulkily
on the world from under a heavy fringe. He had
seen that same expression that morning. ‘Pippa and
Mildred’ was written on the photograph. There was a
photograph of Eric Gulbrandsen hanging on the wall,
with a gold mount and a heavy ebony frame. Curry
had just found a photograph of a good-looking man
with eyes crinkling with laughter who he presumed
was John Restarick when the door opened and Mrs
Serrocold came in.
She wore black, a ﬂoating and diaphanous black. Her
little pink and white face looked unusually small under
its crown of silvery hair, and there was a frailness about
her that caught sharply at Inspector Curry’s heart.
He understood at that moment a good deal that had
perplexed him earlier in the morning. He understood
why people were so anxious to spare Caroline Louise
Serrocold everything that could be spared her.
215

p

q

And yet, he thought, she isn’t the kind that would
ever make a fuss . . .
She greeted him, asked him to sit down, and took
a chair near him. It was less he who put her at her
ease than she who put him at his. He started to
ask his questions and she answered them readily and
without hesitation. The failure of the lights, the quarrel
between Edgar Lawson and her husband, the shot they
had heard . . .
‘It did not seem to you that the shot was in the
house?’
‘No, I thought it came from outside. I thought it
might have been the backﬁre of a car.’
‘During the quarrel between your husband and this
young fellow Lawson in the study, did you notice
anybody leaving the Hall?’
‘Wally had already gone to see about the lights. Miss
Bellever went out shortly afterwards – to get something,
but I can’t remember what.’
‘Who else left the Hall?’
‘Nobody, so far as I know.’
‘Would you know, Mrs Serrocold?’
She reﬂected a moment.
‘No, I don’t think I should.’
‘You were completely absorbed in what you could
hear going on in the study?’
‘Yes.’
216

They do it with Mirrors

‘And you were apprehensive as to what might happen there?’
‘No – no, I wouldn’t say that. I didn’t think anything
would really happen.’
‘But Lawson had a revolver?’
‘Yes.’
‘And was threatening your husband with it?’
‘Yes. But he didn’t mean it.’
Inspector Curry felt his usual slight exasperation at
this statement. So she was another of them!
‘You can’t possibly have been sure of that, Mrs
Serrocold.’
‘Well, but I was sure. In my own mind, I mean. What
is it the young people say – putting on an act? That’s
what I felt it was. Edgar’s only a boy. He was being
melodramatic and silly and fancying himself as a bold
desperate character. Seeing himself as the wronged
hero in a romantic story. I was quite sure he would
never ﬁre that revolver.’
‘But he did ﬁre it, Mrs Serrocold.’
Carrie Louise smiled.
‘I expect it went off by accident.’
Again exasperation mounted in Inspector Curry.
‘It was not an accident. Lawson ﬁred that revolver
twice – and ﬁred it at your husband. The bullets only
just missed him.’
Carrie Louise looked startled and then grave.
217

p

q

‘I can’t really believe that. Oh yes’ – she hurried on
to forestall the Inspector’s protest – ‘of course I have to
believe it if you tell me so. But I still feel there must be a
simple explanation. Perhaps Dr Maverick can explain
it to me.’
‘Oh yes, Dr Maverick will explain it all right,’ said
Curry grimly. ‘Dr Maverick can explain anything. I’m
sure of that.’
Unexpectedly Mrs Serrocold said:
‘I know that a lot of what we do here seems to you
foolish and pointless, and psychiatrists can be very
irritating sometimes. But we do achieve results, you
know. We have our failures, but we have successes
too. And what we try to do is worth doing. And
though you probably won’t believe it, Edgar is really
devoted to my husband. He started this silly business
about Lewis’s being his father because he wants so
much to have a father like Lewis. But what I can’t
understand is why he should suddenly get violent.
He had been so very much better – really practically normal. Indeed he has always seemed normal
to me.’
The Inspector did not argue the point.
He said: ‘The revolver that Edgar Lawson had was
one belonging to your granddaughter’s husband. Presumably Lawson took it from Walter Hudd’s room.
Now tell me, have you ever seen this weapon before?’
218

They do it with Mirrors

On the palm of his hand he held out the small black
automatic.
Carrie Louise looked at it.
‘No, I don’t think so.’
‘I found it in the piano stool. It has recently been
ﬁred. We haven’t had time to check on it fully yet, but
I should say that it is almost certainly the weapon with
which Mr Gulbrandsen was shot.’
She frowned.
‘And you found it in the piano stool?’
‘Under some very old music. Music that I should
say had not been played for years.’
‘Hidden, then?’
‘Yes. You remember who was at the piano last
night?’
‘Stephen Restarick.’
‘He was playing?’
‘Yes. Just softly. A funny melancholy little tune.’
‘When did he stop playing, Mrs Serrocold?’
‘When did he stop? I don’t know.’
‘But he did stop? He didn’t go on playing all through
the quarrel.’
‘No. The music just died down.’
‘Did he get up from the piano stool?’
‘I don’t know. I’ve no idea what he did until he
came over to the study door to try and ﬁt a key to
it.’
219

q

p

‘Can you think of any reason why Stephen Restarick
should shoot Mr Gulbrandsen?’
‘None whatever.’ She added thoughtfully, ‘I don’t
believe he did.’
‘Gulbrandsen might have found out something discreditable about him.’
‘That seems to me very unlikely.’
Inspector Curry had a wild wish to reply:
‘Pigs may ﬂy but they’re very unlikely birds.’ It had
been a saying of his grandmother’s. Miss Marple, he
thought, was sure to know it.

III
Carrie Louise came down the broad stairway and three
people converged upon her from different directions,
Gina from the long corridor, Miss Marple from the
library, and Juliet Bellever from the Great Hall.
Gina spoke ﬁrst.
‘Darling!’ she exclaimed passionately. ‘Are you all
right? They haven’t bullied you or given you third
degree or anything?’
‘Of course not, Gina. What odd ideas you have!
Inspector Curry was charming and most considerate.’
‘So he ought to be,’ said Miss Bellever. ‘Now, Carrie,
220

They do it with Mirrors

I’ve got all your letters here and a parcel. I was going to
bring them up to you.’
‘Bring them into the library,’ said Carrie Louise.
All four of them went into the library.
Carrie Louise sat down and began opening her
letters. There were about twenty or thirty of them.
As she opened them, she handed them to Miss
Bellever, who sorted them into heaps, explaining to
Miss Marple as she did so:
‘Three main categories. One – from relations of
the boys. Those I hand over to Dr Maverick. Begging letters I deal with myself. And the rest are
personal – and Cara gives me notes on how to deal
with them.’
The correspondence once disposed of, Mrs Serrocold
turned her attention to the parcel, cutting the string
with scissors.
Out of the neat wrappings there appeared an attractive box of chocolates tied up with gold ribbon.
‘Someone must think it’s my birthday,’ said Mrs
Serrocold with a smile.
She slipped off the ribbon and opened the box.
Inside was a visiting card. Carrie Louise looked at it
with slight surprise.
‘With love from Alex,’ she said. ‘How odd of him to
send me a box of chocolates by post on the same day
he was coming down here.’
221

p

q

Uneasiness stirred in Miss Marple’s mind.
She said quickly:
‘Wait a minute, Carrie Louise. Don’t eat one yet.’
Mrs Serrocold looked faintly surprised.
‘I was going to hand them round.’
‘Well, don’t. Wait while I ask – Is Alex about the
house, do you know, Gina?’
Gina said quickly: ‘Alex was in the Hall just now,
I think.’
She went across, opened the door, and called him.
Alex Restarick appeared in the doorway a moment
later.
‘Madonna darling! So you’re up. None the worse?’
He came across to Mrs Serrocold and kissed her
gently on both cheeks.
Miss Marple said:
‘Carrie Louise wants to thank you for the chocolates.’
Alex looked surprised.
‘What chocolates?’
‘These chocolates,’ said Carrie Louise.
‘But I never sent you any chocolates, darling.’
‘The box has got your card in,’ said Miss Bellever.
Alex peered down.
‘So it has. How odd. How very odd . . . I certainly
didn’t send them.’
‘What a very extraordinary thing,’ said Miss Bellever.
222

They do it with Mirrors

‘They look absolutely scrumptious,’ said Gina, peering into the box. ‘Look, Grandam, there are your
favourite Kirsch ones in the middle.’
Miss Marple gently but ﬁrmly took the box away
from her. Without a word she took it out of the room
and went to ﬁnd Lewis Serrocold. It took her some
time because he had gone over to the College – she
found him in Dr Maverick’s room there. She put the
box on the table in front of him. He listened to her brief
account of the circumstances. His face grew suddenly
stern and hard.
Carefully, he and the doctor lifted out chocolate after
chocolate and examined them.
‘I think,’ said Dr Maverick, ‘that these ones I have
put aside have almost certainly been tampered with.
You see the unevenness of the chocolate coating underneath? The next thing to do is to get them analysed.’
‘But it seems incredible,’ said Miss Marple. ‘Why,
everyone in the house might have been poisoned!’
Lewis nodded. His face was still white and hard.
‘Yes. There is a ruthlessness – a disregard –’ he
broke off. ‘Actually I think all these particular chocolates are Kirsch ﬂavouring. That is Caroline’s favourite. So, you see, there is knowledge behind this.’
Miss Marple said quietly:
‘If it is as you suspect – if there is – poison – in these
chocolates, then I’m afraid Carrie Louise will have to
223

p

q

know what is going on. She must be put upon her
guard.’
Lewis Serrocold said heavily:
‘Yes. She will have to know that someone wants to
kill her. I think that she will ﬁnd it almost impossible
to believe.’

224

Chapter 16

I
‘ ’Ere, Miss. Is it true as there’s an ’ideous poisoner
at work?’
Gina pushed the hair back from her forehead and
jumped as the hoarse whisper reached her. There was
paint on her cheek and paint on her slacks. She and her
selected helpers had been busy on the backcloth of the
Nile at Sunset for their next theatrical production.
It was one of these helpers who was now asking the question. Ernie, the boy who had given her
such valuable lessons in the manipulation of locks.
Ernie’s ﬁngers were equally dexterous at stage carpentry, and he was one of the most enthusiastic theatrical
assistants.
His eyes now were bright and beady with pleasurable
anticipation.
Ernie shut one eye.
‘It’s all round the dorms,’ he said. ‘But look ’ere,
225

p

q

Miss, it wasn’t one of us. Not a thing like that. And
nobody wouldn’t do a thing to Mrs Serrocold. Even
Jenkins wouldn’t cosh her. ’Tisn’t as though it was the
old bitch. Wouldn’t ’alf like to poison ’er, I wouldn’t.’
‘Don’t talk like that about Miss Bellever.’
‘Sorry, Miss. It slipped out. What poison was it,
Miss? Strickline, was it? Makes you arch your back
and die in agonies, that does. Or was it Prussian
acid?’
‘I don’t know what you’re talking about, Ernie.’
Ernie winked again.
‘Not ’alf you don’t! Mr Alex it was done it, so they
say. Brought them chocs down from London. But
that’s a lie. Mr Alex wouldn’t do a thing like that,
would he, Miss?’
‘Of course he wouldn’t,’ said Gina.
‘Much more likely to be Mr Baumgarten. When he’s
giving us P.T. he makes the most awful faces, and Don
and I think as he’s batty.’
‘Just move that turpentine out of the way.’
Ernie obeyed, murmuring to himself:
‘Don’t ’arf see life ’ere! Old Gulbrandsen done in
yesterday and now a secret poisoner. D’you think
it’s the same person doing both? What ’ud you say,
Miss, if I told you as I know oo it was done ’im
in?’
‘You can’t possibly know anything about it.’
226

They do it with Mirrors

‘Coo, carn’t I neither? Supposin’ I was outside last
night and saw something.’
‘How could you have been out? The College is
locked up after roll call at seven.’
‘Roll call . . . I can get out whenever I likes, Miss.
Locks don’t mean nothing to me. Get out and walk
around the grounds just for the fun of it, I do.’
Gina said:
‘I wish you’d stop telling lies, Ernie.’
‘Who’s telling lies?’
‘You are. You tell lies and you boast about things
that you’ve never done at all.’
‘That’s what you say, Miss. You wait till the coppers come round and arsk me all about what I saw
last night.’
‘Well, what did you see?’
‘Ah,’ said Ernie, ‘wouldn’t you like to know?’
Gina made a rush at him and he beat a strategic
retreat. Stephen came over from the other side of
the theatre and joined Gina. They discussed various
technical matters and then, side by side, they walked
back towards the house.
‘They all seem to know about Grandam and the
chocs,’ said Gina. ‘The boys, I mean. How do they
get to know?’
‘Local grapevine of some kind.’
‘And they knew about Alex’s card. Stephen, surely
227

p

q

it was very stupid to put Alex’s card in the box when
he was actually coming down here.’
‘Yes, but who knew he was coming down here? He
decided to come on the spur of the moment and sent a
telegram. Probably the box was posted by then. And if
he hadn’t come down, putting his card in would have
been quite a good idea. Because he does send Caroline
chocolates sometimes.’
He went on slowly:
‘What I simply can’t understand is –’
‘Is why anyone should want to poison, Grandam,’
Gina cut in. ‘I know. It’s inconceivable! She’s so adorable – and absolutely everyone does adore her.’
Stephen did not answer. Gina looked at him
sharply.
‘I know what you’re thinking, Steve!’
‘I wonder.’
‘You’re thinking that Wally – doesn’t adore her.
But Wally would never poison anyone. The idea’s
laughable.’
‘The loyal wife!’
‘Don’t say that in that sneering tone of voice.’
‘I didn’t mean to sneer. I think you are loyal. I
admire you for it. But darling Gina, you can’t keep
it up, you know.’
‘What do you mean, Steve?’
‘You know quite well what I mean. You and Wally
228

They do it with Mirrors

don’t belong together. It’s just one of those things that
doesn’t work. He knows it too. The split is going to
come any day now. And you’ll both be much happier
when it has come.’
Gina said:
‘Don’t be idiotic.’
Stephen laughed.
‘Come now, you can’t pretend that you’re suited to
each other or that Wally’s happy here.’
‘Oh, I don’t know what’s the matter with him,’ cried
Gina. ‘He sulks the whole time. He hardly speaks. I
– I don’t know what to do about him. Why can’t
he enjoy himself here? We had such fun together
once – everything was fun – and now he might be
a different person. Why do people have to change
so?’
‘Do I change?’
‘No, Steve darling. You’re always Steve. Do you
remember how I used to tag round after you in the
holidays?’
‘And what a nuisance I used to think you – that
miserable little kid Gina. Well, the tables are turned
now. You’ve got me where you want me, haven’t
you, Gina?’
Gina said quickly:
‘Idiot.’ She went on hurriedly, ‘Do you think Ernie
was lying? He was pretending he was roaming about
229

q

p

in the fog last night, and hinting that he could tell
things about the murder. Do you think that might
be true?’
‘True? Of course not. You know how he boasts.
Anything to make himself important.’
‘Oh, I know. I only wondered –’
They walked along side by side without speaking.

II
The setting sun illumined the west façade of the house.
Inspector Curry looked towards it.
‘Is this about the place where you stopped your car
last night?’ he asked.
Alex Restarick stood back a little as though considering.
‘Near enough,’ he said. ‘It’s difﬁcult to tell exactly
because of the fog. Yes, I should say this was the
place.’
Inspector Curry stood looking round with an appraising eye.
The gravelled sweep of drive swept round in a slow
curve, and at this point, emerging from a screen of
rhododendrons, the west façade of the house came
suddenly into view with its terrace and yew hedges and
steps leading down to the lawns. Thereafter the drive
230

They do it with Mirrors

continued in its curving progress, sweeping through a
belt of trees and round between the lake and the house
until it ended in the big gravel sweep at the east side of
the house.
‘Dodgett,’ said Inspector Curry.
Police Constable Dodgett, who had been holding
himself at the ready, started spasmodically into motion.
He hurled himself across the intervening space of lawn
in a diagonal line towards the house, reached the
terrace, went in by the side door. A few moments
later the curtains of one of the windows were violently
agitated. Then Constable Dodgett reappeared out of
the garden door, and ran back to rejoin them, breathing
like a steam engine.
‘Two minutes and forty-two seconds,’ said Inspector
Curry, clicking the stop watch with which he had
been timing him. ‘They don’t take long, these things,
do they?’
His tone was pleasantly conversational.
‘I don’t run as fast as your constable,’ said Alex. ‘I
presume it is my supposed movements you have been
timing?’
‘I’m just pointing out that you had the opportunity
to do murder. That’s all, Mr Restarick. I’m not making
any accusations – as yet.’
Alex Restarick said kindly to Constable Dodgett,
who was still panting:
231

p

q

‘I can’t run as fast as you can, but I believe I’m in
better training.’
‘It’s since ’aving the bronchitis last winter,’ said
Dodgett.
Alex turned back to the Inspector.
‘Seriously, though, in spite of trying to make me
uncomfortable and observing my reactions – and you
must remember that we artistic folk are oh! so sensitive,
such tender plants!’ – his voice took on a mocking note
– ‘you can’t really believe I had anything to do with all
this? I’d hardly send a box of poisoned chocolates to
Mrs Serrocold and put my card inside, would I?’
‘That might be what we are meant to think. There’s
such a thing as a double bluff, Mr Restarick.’
‘Oh, I see. How ingenious you are. By the way, those
chocolates were poisoned?’
‘The six chocolates containing Kirsch ﬂavouring in
the top layer were poisoned, yes. They contained
aconitine.’
‘Not one of my favourite poisons, Inspector. Personally, I have a weakness for curare.’
‘Curare has to be introduced into the bloodstream,
Mr Restarick, not into the stomach.’
‘How wonderfully knowledgeable the police force
are,’ said Alex admiringly.
Inspector Curry cast a quiet sideways glance at the
young man. He noted the slightly pointed ears, the
232

They do it with Mirrors

un-English Mongolian type of face. The eyes that
danced with mischievous mockery. It would have been
hard at any time to know what Alex Restarick was
thinking. A satyr – or did he mean a faun? An overfed
faun, Inspector Curry thought suddenly, and somehow
there was an unpleasantness about that idea.
A twister with brains – that’s how he would sum
up Alex Restarick. Cleverer than his brother. Mother
had been a Russian or so he had heard. ‘Russians’ to
Inspector Curry were what ‘Bony’ had been in the early
days of the nineteenth century, and what ‘the Huns’
had been in the early twentieth century. Anything to do
with Russia was bad in Inspector Curry’s opinion, and
if Alex Restarick had murdered Gulbrandsen he would
be a very satisfactory criminal. But unfortunately Curry
was by no means convinced that he had.
Constable Dodgett, having recovered his breath,
now spoke.
‘I moved the curtains as you told me, sir,’ he said.
‘And counted thirty. I noticed that the curtains have
a hook torn off at the top. Means that there’s a gap.
You’d see the light in the room from outside.’
Inspector Curry said to Alex:
‘Did you notice light streaming out from that window last night?’
‘I couldn’t see the house at all because of the fog. I
told you so.’
233

p

q

‘Fog’s patchy, though. Sometimes it clears for a
minute here and there.’
‘It never cleared so that I could see the house –
the main part, that is. The gymnasium building close
at hand loomed up out of the mist in a deliciously
unsubstantial way. It gave a perfect illusion of dock
warehouses. As I told you, I am putting on a Limehouse
Ballet and –’
‘You told me,’ agreed Inspector Curry.
‘One gets in the habit, you know, of looking at things
from the point of view of a stage set, rather than from
the point of view of reality.’
‘I daresay. And yet a stage set’s real enough, isn’t it,
Mr Restarick?’
‘I don’t see exactly what you mean, Inspector.’
‘Well, it’s made of real materials – canvas and wood
and paint and cardboard. The illusion is in the eye of
the beholder, not in the set itself. That, as I say, is real
enough, as real behind the scenes as it is in front.’
Alex stared at him.
‘Now that, you know, is a very penetrating remark,
Inspector. It’s given me an idea.’
‘For another ballet?’
‘No, not for another ballet . . . Dear me, I wonder
if we’ve all been rather stupid?’

234

They do it with Mirrors

III
The Inspector and Dodgett went back to the house
across the lawn. (Looking for footprints, Alex said
to himself. But here he was wrong. They had looked
for footprints very early that morning and had been
unsuccessful because it had rained heavily at 2 a.m.)
Alex walked slowly up the drive, turning over in his
mind the possibilities of his new idea.
He was diverted from this, however, by the sight of
Gina walking on the path by the lake. The house was on
a slight eminence, and the ground sloped gently down
from the front sweeps of gravel to the lake, which was
bordered by rhododendrons and other shrubs. Alex ran
down the gravel and found Gina.
‘If you could black out that absurd Victorian monstrosity,’ he said, screwing up his eyes, ‘this would make
a very good Swan Lake, with you, Gina, as the Swan
Maiden. You are more like the Snow Queen though,
when I come to think of it. Ruthless, determined to
have your own way, quite without pity or kindliness
or the rudiments of compassion. You are very, very
feminine, Gina dear.’
‘How malicious you are, Alex dear!’
‘Because I refuse to be taken in by you? You’re very
pleased with yourself, aren’t you, Gina? You’ve got us
235

p

q

all where you want us. Myself, Stephen, and that large
simple husband of yours.’
‘You’re talking nonsense.’
‘Oh no, I’m not. Stephen’s in love with you. I’m
in love with you, and Wally’s desperately miserable.
What more could a woman want?’
Gina looked at him and laughed.
Alex nodded his head vigorously.
‘You have the rudiments of honesty, I’m glad to see.
That’s the Latin in you. You don’t go to the trouble of
pretending that you’re not attractive to men – and that
you’re terribly sorry about it if they are attracted to you.
You like having men in love with you, don’t you, cruel
Gina? Even miserable little Edgar Lawson!’
Gina looked at him steadily.
She said in a quiet serious tone:
‘It doesn’t last very long, you know. Women have
a much worse time of it in the world than men do.
They’re more vulnerable. They have children, and they
mind – terribly – about their children. As soon as they
lose their looks, the men they love don’t love them any
more. They’re betrayed and deserted and pushed aside.
I don’t blame men. I’d be the same myself. I don’t like
people who are old or ugly or ill or who whine about
their troubles or who are ridiculous like Edgar, strutting
about and pretending he’s important and worthwhile.
You say I’m cruel? It’s a cruel world! Sooner or later
236

They do it with Mirrors

it will be cruel to me! But now I’m young and I’m
nice looking and people ﬁnd me attractive.’ Her teeth
ﬂashed out in her peculiar warm sunny smile. ‘Yes, I
enjoy it, Alex. Why shouldn’t I?’
‘Why indeed?’ said Alex. ‘What I want to know is
what are you going to do about it. Are you going to
marry Stephen or are you going to marry me?’
‘I’m married to Wally.’
‘Temporarily. Every woman should make one mistake matrimonially – but there’s no need to dwell on
it. Having tried out the show in the provinces, the time
has come to bring it to the West End.’
‘And you’re the West End?’
‘Indubitably.’
‘Do you really want to marry me? I can’t imagine
you married.’
‘I insist on marriage. Affaires, I always think, are
so very old-fashioned. Difﬁculties with passports and
hotels and all that. I shall never have a mistress unless
I can’t get her any other way!’
Gina’s laugh rang out fresh and clear.
‘You do amuse me, Alex.’
‘It is my principal asset. Stephen is much better
looking than I am. He’s extremely handsome and very
intense which, of course, women adore. But intensity
is fatiguing in the home. With me, Gina, you will ﬁnd
life entertaining.’
237

p

q

‘Aren’t you going to say you love me madly?’
‘However true that may be, I shall certainly not say
it. It would be one up to you and one down to me if
I did. No, all I am prepared to do is to make you a
businesslike offer of marriage.’
‘I shall have to think about it,’ said Gina smiling.
‘Naturally. Besides, you’ve got to put Wally out of
his misery ﬁrst. I’ve a lot of sympathy with Wally. It
must be absolute hell for him to be married to you
and trailed along at your chariot wheels into this heavy
family atmosphere of philanthropy.’
‘What a beast you are, Alex!’
‘A perceptive beast.’
‘Sometimes,’ said Gina, ‘I don’t think Wally cares for
me one little bit. He just doesn’t notice me any more.’
‘You’ve stirred him up with a stick and he doesn’t
respond? Most annoying.’
Like a ﬂash Gina swung her palm and delivered a
ringing slap on Alex’s smooth cheek.
‘Touché!’ cried Alex.
With a quick deft movement he gathered her into
his arms and before she could resist, his lips fastened
on hers in a long ardent kiss. She struggled a moment
and then relaxed . . .
‘Gina!’
They sprang apart. Mildred Strete, her face red,
her lips quivering, glared at them balefully. For a
238

They do it with Mirrors

moment the eagerness of her words choked their utterance.
‘Disgusting . . . disgusting . . . you abandoned beastly
girl . . . you’re just like your mother . . . You’re a bad
lot . . . I always knew you were a bad lot . . . utterly
depraved . . . and you’re not only an adulteress –
you’re a murderess too. Oh yes, you are. I know what
I know!’
‘And what do you know? Don’t be ridiculous, Aunt
Mildred.’
‘I’m no aunt of yours, thank goodness. No blood
relation to you. Why, you don’t even know who your
mother was or where she came from! But you know
well enough what my father was like and my mother.
What sort of a child do you think they would adopt? A
criminal’s child or prostitute’s probably! That’s the sort
of people they were. They ought to have remembered
that bad blood will tell. Though I daresay that it’s the
Italian in you that makes you turn to poison.’
‘How dare you say that?’
‘I shall say what I like. You can’t deny now, can you,
that somebody tried to poison mother? And who’s the
most likely person to do that? Who comes into an
enormous fortune if mother dies? You do, Gina, and
you may be sure that the police have not overlooked
that fact.’
Still trembling, Mildred moved rapidly away.
239

p

q

‘Pathological,’ said Alex. ‘Deﬁnitely pathological.
Really most interesting. It makes one wonder about the
late Canon Strete . . . religious scruples, perhaps? . . .
Or would you say impotent?’
‘Don’t be disgusting, Alex. Oh I hate her, I hate her,
I hate her.’
Gina clenched her hands and shook with fury.
‘Lucky you hadn’t got a knife in your stocking,’ said
Alex. ‘If you had, dear Mrs Strete might have known
something about murder from the point of view of the
victim. Calm down, Gina. Don’t look so melodramatic
and like Italian Opera.’
‘How dare she say I tried to poison Grandam?’
‘Well, darling, somebody tried to poison her. And
from the point of view of motive you’re well in the
picture, aren’t you?’
‘Alex!’ Gina stared at him, dismayed. ‘Do the police
think so?’
‘It’s extremely difﬁcult to know what the police
think. . . . They keep their own counsel remarkably
well. They’re by no means fools, you know. That
reminds me –’
‘Where are you going?’
‘To work out an idea of mine.’

240

Chapter 17

I
‘You say somebody has been trying to poison me?’
Carrie Louise’s voice held bewilderment and disbelief.
‘You know,’ she said, ‘I can’t really believe it . . .’
She waited a few moments, her eyes half closed.
Lewis said gently, ‘I wish I could have spared you
this, dearest.’
Almost absently she stretched out a hand to him and
he took it.
Miss Marple, sitting close by, shook her head sympathetically.
Carrie Louise opened her eyes.
‘Is it really true, Jane?’ she asked.
‘I’m afraid so, my dear.’
‘Then everything –’ Carrie Louise broke off.
She went on:
‘I’ve always thought I knew what was real and what
241

p

q

wasn’t . . . This doesn’t seem real – but it is . . . So I
may be wrong everywhere . . . But who could want to
do such a thing to me? Nobody in this house could
want to – kill me?’
Her voice still held incredulity.
‘That’s what I would have thought,’ said Lewis. ‘I
was wrong.’
‘And Christian knew about it? That explains it.’
‘Explains what?’ asked Lewis.
‘His manner,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘It was very odd,
you know. Not at all his usual self. He seemed –
upset about me – as though he was wanting to say
something to me – and then not saying it. And he
asked me if my heart was strong? And if I’d been well
lately? Trying to hint to me, perhaps. But why not say
something straight out? It’s so much simpler just to say
it straight out.’
‘He didn’t want to – cause you pain, Caroline.’
‘Pain? But why – Oh I see . . .’ Her eyes widened.
‘So that’s what you believe. But you’re wrong, Lewis,
quite wrong. I can assure you of that.’
Her husband avoided her eyes.
‘I’m sorry,’ said Mrs Serrocold after a moment or
two. ‘But I can’t believe anything of what has happened
lately is true. Edgar shooting at you. Gina and Stephen.
That ridiculous box of chocolates. It just isn’t true.’
Nobody spoke.
242

They do it with Mirrors

Caroline Louise Serrocold sighed.
‘I suppose,’ she said, ‘that I must have lived outside
reality for a long time . . . Please, both of you, I
think I would like to be alone . . . I’ve got to try and
understand . . .’

II
Miss Marple came down the stairs and into the Great
Hall to ﬁnd Alex Restarick standing near the large
arched entrance door with his hand ﬂung out in a
somewhat ﬂamboyant gesture.
‘Come in, come in,’ said Alex happily and as though
he were the owner of the Great Hall. ‘I’m just thinking
about last night.’
Lewis Serrocold, who had followed Miss Marple
down from Carrie Louise’s sitting-room, crossed the
Great Hall to his study and went in and shut the
door.
‘Are you trying to reconstruct the crime?’ asked Miss
Marple with subdued eagerness.
‘Eh?’ Alex looked at her with a frown. Then his brow
cleared.
‘Oh that,’ he said. ‘No, not exactly. I was looking
at the whole thing from an entirely different point of
view. I was thinking of this place in the terms of the
243

p

q

theatre. Not reality, but artiﬁciality! Just come over
here. Think of it in the terms of a stage set. Lighting,
entrances, exits. Dramatis Personae. Noises off. All
very interesting. Not all my own idea. The Inspector
gave it to me. I think he’s rather a cruel man. He did
his best to frighten me this morning.’
‘And did he frighten you?’
‘I’m not sure.’
Alex described the Inspector’s experiment and the
timing of the performance of the pufﬁng Constable
Dodgett.
‘Time,’ he said, ‘is so very misleading. One thinks
things take such a long time, but really, of course,
they don’t.’
‘No,’ said Miss Marple.
Representing the audience, she moved to a different
position. The stage set now consisted of a vast tapestry
covered wall going up to dimness, with a grand piano
up L. and a window and window seat up R. Very near
the window seat was the door into the library. The
piano stool was only about eight feet from the door
into the square lobby which led to the corridor. Two
very convenient exits! The audience, of course, had an
excellent view of both of them . . .
But last night, there had been no audience. Nobody,
that is to say, had been facing the stage set that Miss
Marple was now facing. The audience, last night,
244

They do it with Mirrors

had been sitting with their backs to that particular
stage.
How long, Miss Marple wondered, would it have
taken to slip out of the room, run along the corridor,
shoot Gulbrandsen and come back? Not nearly so long
as one would think. Measured in minutes and seconds
a very short time indeed . . .
What had Carrie Louise meant when she had said to
her husband: ‘So that’s what you believe – but you’re
wrong, Lewis!’
‘I must say that that was a very penetrating remark of
the Inspector’s,’ Alex’s voice cut in on her meditations.
‘About a stage set being real. Made of wood and
cardboard and stuck together with glue and as real
on the unpainted as on the painted side. “The illusion,”
he pointed out, “is in the eyes of the audience.”’
‘Like conjurers,’ Miss Marple murmured vaguely.
‘They do it with mirrors is, I believe, the slang phrase.’
Stephen Restarick came in, slightly out of breath.
‘Hallo, Alex,’ he said. ‘That little rat, Ernie Gregg –
I don’t know if you remember him?’
‘The one who played Feste when you did Twelfth
Night? Quite a bit of talent there, I thought.’
‘Yes, he’s got talent of a sort. Very good with his
hands too. Does a lot of our carpentry. However, that’s
neither here nor there. He’s been boasting to Gina that
he gets out at night and wanders about the grounds.
245

p

q

Says he was wandering round last night and boasts he
saw something.’
Alex spun round.
‘Saw what?’
‘Says he’s not going to tell. Actually I’m pretty
certain he’s only trying to show off and get into the
limelight. He’s an awful liar, but I thought perhaps he
ought to be questioned.’
Alex said sharply: ‘I should leave him for a bit. Don’t
let him think we’re too interested.’
‘Perhaps – yes, I think you may be right there. This
evening, perhaps.’
Stephen went on into the library.
Miss Marple, moving gently round the Hall in
her character of mobile audience, collided with Alex
Restarick as he stepped back suddenly.
Miss Marple said, ‘I’m so sorry.’
Alex frowned at her, said in an absent sort of way:
‘I beg your pardon,’ and then added in a surprised
voice: ‘Oh, it’s you.’
It seemed to Miss Marple an odd remark for someone with whom she had been conversing for some
considerable time.
‘I was thinking of something else,’ said Alex Restarick.
‘That boy Ernie –’ He made vague motions with both
hands.
Then, with a sudden change of manner, he crossed
246

They do it with Mirrors

the Hall and went through the library door, shutting it
behind him.
The murmur of voices came from behind the closed
door, but Miss Marple hardly noticed them. She was
uninterested in the versatile Ernie and what he had seen
or pretended to see. She had a shrewd suspicion that
Ernie had seen nothing at all. She did not believe for a
moment that on a cold raw foggy night like last night,
Ernie would have troubled to use his lockpicking activities and wander about in the Park. In all probability
he never had got out at night. Boasting, that was all
it had been.
‘Like Johnnie Backhouse,’ thought Miss Marple,
who always had a good storehouse of parallels to draw
upon selected from inhabitants of St Mary Mead.
‘I seen you last night,’ had been Johnnie Backhouse’s
unpleasant taunt to all he thought it might affect.
It had been a surprisingly successful remark. So
many people, Miss Marple reﬂected, have been in
places where they are anxious not to be seen!
She dismissed Johnnie from her mind and concentrated on a vague something which Alex’s account of
Inspector Curry’s remarks had stirred to life. Those
remarks had given Alex an idea. She was not sure that
they had not given her an idea, too. The same idea?
Or a different one?
She stood where Alex Restarick had stood. She
247

p

q

thought to herself, ‘This is not a real Hall. This is
only cardboard and canvas and wood. This is a stage
scene . . .’ Scrappy phrases ﬂashed across her mind.
‘Illusion –’ ‘In the eyes of the audience.’ ‘They do it with
mirrors . . .’ Bowls of goldﬁsh . . . yards of coloured
ribbon . . . vanishing ladies . . . all the panoply and
misdirection of the conjurer’s art . . .
Something stirred in her consciousness – a picture
– something that Alex had said . . . something that he
had described to her . . . Constable Dodgett pufﬁng
and panting . . . Panting . . . Something shifted in her
mind – came into sudden focus . . .
‘Why of course!’ said Miss Marple. ‘That must be
it . . .’

248

Chapter 18

I
‘Oh, Wally, how you startled me!’
Gina, emerging from the shadows by the theatre,
jumped back a little, as the ﬁgure of Wally Hudd
materialized out of the gloom. It was not yet quite
dark, but had that eerie half light when objects lose their
reality and take on the fantastic shapes of nightmare.
‘What are you doing down here? You never come
near the theatre as a rule.’
‘Maybe I was looking for you, Gina. It’s usually the
best place to ﬁnd you, isn’t it?’
Wally’s soft, faintly drawling voice held no special
insinuation, and yet Gina ﬂinched a little.
‘It’s a job and I’m keen on it. I like the atmosphere
of paint and canvas, and back stage generally.’
‘Yes. It means a lot to you. I’ve seen that. Tell me,
Gina, how long do you think it will be before this
business is all cleared up?’
249

p

q

‘The inquest’s tomorrow. It will just be adjourned
for a fortnight or something like that. At least, that’s
what Inspector Curry gave us to understand.’
‘A fortnight,’ said Wally thoughtfully. ‘I see. Say
three weeks, perhaps. And after that – we’re free. I’m
going back to the States then.’
‘Oh! but I can’t rush off like that,’ cried Gina. ‘I
couldn’t leave Grandam. And we’ve got these two new
productions we’re working on –’
‘I didn’t say “we.” I said I was going.’
Gina stopped and looked up at her husband. Something in the effect of the shadows made him seem very
big. A big, quiet ﬁgure – and in some way, or so it
seemed to her, faintly menacing . . . Standing over her.
Threatening – what?
‘Do you mean’ – she hesitated – ‘you don’t want me
to come?’
‘Why, no – I didn’t say that.’
‘You don’t care if I come or not? Is that it?’
She was suddenly angry.
‘See here, Gina. This is where we’ve got to have a
showdown. We didn’t know much about each other
when we got married – not much about each other’s
backgrounds, not much about the other one’s folks. We
thought it didn’t matter. We thought nothing mattered
except having a swell time together. Well, stage one
is over. Your folks didn’t – and don’t – think much
250

They do it with Mirrors

of me. Maybe they’re right. I’m not their kind. But if
you think I’m staying on here, kicking my heels, and
doing odd jobs in what I consider is just a crazy set-up
– well, think again! I want to live in my own country,
doing the kind of job I want to do, and can do. My
idea of a wife is the kind of wife who used to go along
with the old pioneers, ready for anything, hardship,
unfamiliar country, danger, strange surroundings . . .
Perhaps that’s too much to ask of you, but it’s that
or nothing! Maybe I hustled you into marriage. If so,
you’d better get free of me and start again. It’s up to
you. If you prefer one of these arty boys – it’s your life
and you’ve got to choose. But I’m going home.’
‘I think you’re an absolute pig,’ said Gina. ‘I’m
enjoying myself here.’
‘Is that so? Well, I’m not. You even enjoy murder,
I suppose?’
Gina drew in her breath sharply.
‘That’s a cruel wicked thing to say. I was very fond
of Uncle Christian. And don’t you realize that someone
has been quietly poisoning Grandam for months? It’s
horrible!’
‘I told you I didn’t like it here. I don’t like the kind
of things that go on. I’m quitting.’
‘If you’re allowed to! Don’t you realize you’ll probably be arrested for Uncle Christian’s murder? I hate
the way Inspector Curry looks at you. He’s just like a
251

p

q

cat watching a mouse with a nasty sharp-clawed paw all
ready to pounce. Just because you were out of the Hall
ﬁxing those lights, and because you’re not English, I’m
sure they’ll go fastening it on you.’
‘They’ll need some evidence ﬁrst.’
Gina wailed:
‘I’m frightened for you, Wally. I’ve been frightened
all along.’
‘No good being scared. I tell you they’ve got nothing
on me!’
They walked in silence towards the house.
Gina said:
‘I don’t believe you really want me to come back to
America with you . . .’
Walter Hudd did not answer.
Gina Hudd turned on him and stamped her foot.
‘I hate you. I hate you. You are horrible – a beast
– a cruel unfeeling beast. After all I’ve tried to do for
you! You want to be rid of me. You don’t care if you
never see me again. Well, I don’t care if I never see
you again! I was a stupid little fool ever to marry you,
and I shall get a divorce as soon as possible, and I shall
marry Stephen or Alexis and be much happier than I
ever could be with you. And I hope you go back to
the States and marry some horrible girl who makes
you really miserable!’
‘Fine!’ said Wally. ‘Now we know where we are!’
252

They do it with Mirrors

II
Miss Marple saw Gina and Wally go into the house
together.
She was standing at the spot where Inspector Curry
had made his experiment with Constable Dodgett
earlier in the afternoon.
Miss Bellever’s voice behind her made her jump.
‘You’ll get a chill, Miss Marple, standing about like
that after the sun’s gone down.’
Miss Marple fell meekly into step with her and they
walked briskly through the house.
‘I was thinking about conjuring tricks,’ said Miss
Marple. ‘So difﬁcult when you’re watching them to see
how they’re done, and yet, once they are explained, so
absurdly simple. (Although, even now, I can’t imagine
how conjurers produce bowls of goldﬁsh!) Did you
ever see the Lady who is Sawn in Half – such a thrilling
trick. It fascinated me when I was eleven years old, I
remember. And I never could think how it was done.
But the other day there was an article in some paper
giving the whole thing away. I don’t think a newspaper
should do that, do you? It seems it’s not one girl – but
two. The head of one and the feet of the other. You
think it’s one girl and it’s really two – and the other
way round would work equally well, wouldn’t it?’
253

p

q

Miss Bellever looked at her with faint surprise.
Miss Marple was not often so ﬂuffy and incoherent
as this. ‘It’s all been too much for the old lady,’ she
thought.
‘When you only look at one side of a thing, you only
see one side,’ continued Miss Marple. ‘But everything
ﬁts in perfectly well if you can only make up your mind
what is reality and what is illusion.’ She added abruptly,
‘Is Carrie Louise – all right?’
‘Yes,’ said Miss Bellever. ‘She’s all right, but it
must have been a shock, you know – ﬁnding out that
someone wanted to kill her. I mean particularly a shock
to her, because she doesn’t understand violence.’
‘Carrie Louise understands some things that we
don’t,’ said Miss Marple thoughtfully. ‘She always
has.’
‘I know what you mean – but she doesn’t live in the
real world.’
‘Doesn’t she?’
Miss Bellever looked at her in surprise.
‘There never was a more unworldly person than
Cara –’
‘You don’t think that perhaps –’ Miss Marple broke
off, as Edgar Lawson passed them, swinging along at
a great pace. He gave a kind of shamefaced nod, but
averted his face as he passed.
‘I’ve remembered now who he reminds me of,’ said
254

They do it with Mirrors

Miss Marple. ‘It came to me suddenly just a few
moments ago. He reminds me of a young man called
Leonard Wylie. His father was a dentist, but he got old
and blind and his hand used to shake, and so people
preferred to go to the son. But the old man was very
miserable about it, and moped, said he was no good
for anything any more, and Leonard who was very
soft-hearted and rather foolish, began to pretend he
drank more than he should. He always smelt of whisky
and he used to sham being rather fuddled when his
patients came. His idea was that they’d go back to the
father again and say the younger man was no good.’
‘And did they?’
‘Of course not,’ said Miss Marple. ‘What happened
was what anybody with any sense could have told him
would happen! The patients went to Mr Reilly, the
rival dentist. So many people with good hearts have no
sense. Besides, Leonard Wylie was so unconvincing . . .
His idea of drunkenness wasn’t in the least like real
drunkenness, and he overdid the whisky – spilling it
on his clothes, you know, to a perfectly impossible
extent.’
They went into the house by the side door.

255



Chapter 19

I
Inside the house, they found the family assembled in
the library. Lewis was walking up and down, and
there was an air of general tension in the atmosphere.
‘Is anything the matter?’ asked Miss Bellever.
Lewis said shortly: ‘Ernie Gregg is missing from roll
call tonight.’
‘Has he run away?’
‘We don’t know. Maverick and some of the staff are
searching the grounds. If we cannot ﬁnd him we must
communicate with the police.’
‘Grandam!’ Gina ran over to Carrie Louise, startled
by the whiteness of her face. ‘You look ill.’
‘I am unhappy. The poor boy . . .’
Lewis said: ‘I was going to question him this evening
as to whether he had seen anything noteworthy last
night. I have the offer of a good post for him and I
257

p

q

thought that after discussing that, I would bring up the
other topic. Now –’ he broke off.
Miss Marple murmured softly:
‘Foolish boy . . . Poor foolish boy . . .’
She shook her head, and Mrs Serrocold said gently:
‘So you think so too, Jane . . . ?’
Stephen Restarick came in. He said, ‘I missed you
at the theatre, Gina. I thought you said you would –
Hallo, what’s up?’
Lewis repeated his information, and as he ﬁnished
speaking, Dr Maverick came in with a fair-haired boy
with pink cheeks and a suspiciously angelic expression.
Miss Marple remembered his being at dinner on the
night she had arrived at Stonygates.
‘I’ve brought Arthur Jenkins along,’ said Dr Maverick. ‘He seems to have been the last person to talk
to Ernie.’
‘Now, Arthur,’ said Lewis Serrocold, ‘please help us
if you can. Where has Ernie gone? Is this just a prank?’
‘I dunno, sir. Straight, I don’t. Didn’t say nothing to
me, he didn’t. All full of the play at the theatre he was,
that’s all. Said as how he’d had a smashing idea for the
scenery, what Mrs Hudd and Mr Stephen thought was
ﬁrst class.’
‘There’s another thing, Arthur. Ernie claims he was
prowling about the grounds after lock-up last night.
Was that true?’
258

They do it with Mirrors

‘’Course it ain’t. Just boasting, that’s all. Perishing
liar, Ernie. He never got out at night. Used to boast he
could, but he wasn’t that good with locks! He couldn’t
do anything with a lock as was a lock. Anyway ’e was
in larst night, that I do know.’
‘You’re not saying that just to satisfy us, Arthur?’
‘Cross my heart,’ said Arthur virtuously.
Lewis did not look quite satisﬁed.
‘Listen,’ said Dr Maverick. ‘What’s that?’
A murmur of voices was approaching. The door was
ﬂung open and looking very pale and ill, the spectacled
Mr Baumgarten staggered in.
He gasped out: ‘We’ve found him – them. It’s
horrible . . .’
He sank down on a chair and mopped his forehead.
Mildred Strete said sharply:
‘What do you mean – found them?’
Baumgarten was shaking all over.
‘Down at the theatre,’ he said. ‘Their heads crushed
in – the big counterweight must have fallen on them.
Alexis Restarick and that boy Ernie Gregg. They’re
both dead . . .’

259


Chapter 20

I
‘I’ve brought you a cup of strong soup, Carrie Louise,’
said Miss Marple. ‘Now please drink it.’
Mrs Serrocold sat up in the big carved oak fourposter bed. She looked very small and childlike. Her
cheeks had lost their pink ﬂush, and her eyes had a
curiously absent look.
She took the soup obediently from Miss Marple. As
she sipped it, Miss Marple sat down in a chair beside
the bed.
‘First, Christian,’ said Carrie Louise, ‘and now Alex
– and poor, sharp, silly little Ernie. Did he really – know
anything?’
‘I don’t think so,’ said Miss Marple. ‘He was just
telling lies – making himself important by hinting that
he had seen or knew something. The tragedy is that
somebody believed his lies . . .’
261

p

q

Carrie Louise shivered. Her eyes went back to their
far away look.
‘We meant to do so much for these boys . . . We did
do something. Some of them have done wonderfully
well. Several of them are in really responsible positions.
A few slid back – that can’t be helped. Modern civilized
conditions are so complex – too complex for some
simple and undeveloped natures. You know Lewis’s
great scheme? He always felt that transportation was a
thing that had saved many a potential criminal in the
past. They were shipped overseas – and they made
new lives in simpler surroundings. He wants to start
a modern scheme on that basis. To buy up a great
tract of territory – or a group of islands. Finance it
for some years, make it a co-operative self-supporting
community – with everyone taking a stake in it. But
cut off so that the early temptation to go back to cities
and the bad old days can be neutralized. It’s his dream.
But it will take a lot of money, of course, and there
aren’t many philanthropists with vision now. We want
another Eric. Eric would have been enthusiastic.’
Miss Marple picked up a little pair of scissors and
looked at them curiously.
‘What an odd pair of scissors,’ she said. ‘They’ve got
two ﬁngers holes on one side and one on the other.’
Carrie Louise’s eyes came back from that frightening
far distance.
262

They do it with Mirrors

‘Alex gave them to me this morning,’ she said.
‘They’re supposed to make it easier to cut your right
hand nails. Dear boy, he was so enthusiastic. He made
me try them then and there.’
‘And I suppose he gathered up the nail clippings and
took them tidily away,’ said Miss Marple.
‘Yes,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘He –’ She broke off. ‘Why
did you say that?’
‘I was thinking about Alex. He had brains. Yes, he
had brains.’
‘You mean – that’s why he died?’
‘I think so – yes.’
‘He and Ernie – it doesn’t bear thinking about. When
do they think it happened?’
‘Late this evening. Between six and seven o’clock
probably . . .’
‘After they’d knocked off work for the day?’
‘Yes.’
Gina had been down there that evening – and Wally
Hudd. Stephen, too, said he had been down to look for
Gina . . .
But as far as that went, anybody could have –
Miss Marple’s train of thought was interrupted.
Carrie Louise said quietly and unexpectedly:
‘How much do you know, Jane?’
Miss Marple looked up sharply. The eyes of the two
women met.
263

p

q

Miss Marple said slowly: ‘If I was quite sure . . .’
‘I think you are sure, Jane.’
Jane Marple said slowly, ‘What do you want me to
do?’
Carrie leaned back against her pillows.
‘It is in your hands, Jane – You’ll do what you
think right.’
She closed her eyes.
‘Tomorrow’ – Miss Marple hesitated – ‘I shall have
to try and talk to Inspector Curry – if he’ll listen . . .’

264

Chapter 21

I
Inspector Curry said rather impatiently:
‘Yes, Miss Marple?’
‘Could we, do you think, go into the Great Hall.’
Inspector Curry looked faintly surprised.
‘Is that your idea of privacy? Surely in here –’
He looked round the study.
‘It’s not privacy I’m thinking of so much. It’s something I want to show you. Something Alex Restarick
made me see.’
Inspector Curry, stiﬂing a sigh, got up and followed
Miss Marple.
‘Somebody has been talking to you?’ he suggested
hopefully.
‘No,’ said Miss Marple. ‘It’s not a question of what
people have said. It’s really a question of conjuring
tricks. They do it with mirrors, you know – that sort
of thing – if you understand me.’
265



Inspector Curry did not understand. He stared and
wondered if Miss Marple was quite right in the head.
Miss Marple took up her stand and beckoned the
Inspector to stand beside her.
‘I want you to think of this place as a stage set,
Inspector. As it was on the night Christian Gulbrandsen
was killed. You’re here in the audience looking at the
people on the stage. Mrs Serrocold and myself and Mrs
Strete, and Gina and Stephen – and just like on the stage
there are entrances and exits and the characters go out
to different places. Only you don’t think when you’re
in the audience where they are really going to. They go
out “to the front door” or “to the kitchen” and when
the door opens you see a little bit of painted backcloth.
But really of course they go out to the wings – or the
back of the stage with carpenters and electricians, and
other characters waiting to come on – they go out – to
a different world.’
‘I don’t quite see, Miss Marple –’
‘Oh, I know – I daresay it sounds very silly – but if
you think of this as a play and the scene is “the Great
Hall at Stonygates” – what exactly is behind the scene?
– I mean – what is back stage? The terrace – isn’t it? –
the terrace and a lot of windows opening on to it.
‘And that, you see, is how the conjuring trick was
done. It was the trick of the Lady Sawn in Half that
made me think of it.’
266

They do it with Mirrors

‘The Lady Sawn in Half ?’ Inspector Curry was now
quite sure that Miss Marple was a mental case.
‘A most thrilling conjuring trick. You must have seen
it – only not really one girl but two girls. The head of
one and the feet of the other. It looks like one person
and is really two. And so I thought it could just as well
be the other way about. Two people could be really one
person.’
‘Two people really one?’ Inspector Curry looked
desperate.
‘Yes. Not for long. How long did your constable
take in the Park to run to this house and back? Two
minutes and forty-ﬁve seconds, wasn’t it? This would
be less than that. Well under two minutes.’
‘What was under two minutes?’
‘The conjuring trick. The trick when it wasn’t two
people but one person. In there – in the study. We’re
only looking at the visible part of the stage. Behind
the scenes there is the terrace and a row of windows.
So easy when there are two people in the study to
open the study window, get out, run along the terrace
(those footsteps Alex heard), in at the side door, shoot
Christian Gulbrandsen and run back, and during that
time, the other person in the study does both voices so
that we’re all quite sure there are two people in there.
And so there were most of the time, but not for that
little period of under two minutes.’
267



Inspector Curry found his breath and his voice.
‘Do you mean that it was Edgar Lawson who ran
along the terrace and shot Gulbrandsen? Edgar Lawson
who poisoned Mrs Serrocold?’
‘But you see, Inspector, no one has been poisoning Mrs
Serrocold at all. That’s where the misdirection comes
in. Someone very cleverly used the fact that Mrs
Serrocold’s sufferings from arthritis were not unlike the
symptoms of arsenical poisoning. It’s the old conjurer’s
trick of forcing a card on you. Quite easy to add arsenic
to a bottle of tonic – quite easy to add a few lines
to a typewritten letter. But the real reason for Mr
Gulbrandsen’s coming here was the most likely reason
– something to do with the Gulbrandsen Trust. Money,
in fact. Suppose that there had been embezzlement –
embezzlement on a very big scale – you see where that
points? To just one person –’
Inspector Curry gasped: ‘Lewis Serrocold?’ he murmured incredulously.
‘Lewis Serrocold . . .’ said Miss Marple.

268

Chapter 22

I
Part of letter from Gina Hudd to her aunt Mrs Van
Rydock:
– and so you see, darling Aunt Ruth, the whole thing has
been just like a nightmare – especially the end of it. I’ve
told you all about this funny man Edgar Lawson. He
always was a complete rabbit – and when the Inspector
began questioning him and breaking him down, he lost his
nerve completely and scuttled like a rabbit. Just lost his
nerve and ran – literally ran. Jumped out of the window
and round the house and down the drive and then there
was a policeman coming to head him off, and he swerved
and ran full tilt for the lake. He leaped into a rotten old
punt that’s mouldered there for years and pushed off.
Quite a mad senseless thing to do, of course, but as I say
he was just a panic-stricken rabbit. And then Lewis gave
a great shout and said ‘That punt’s rotten,’ and raced off

269



to the lake too. The punt went down and there was Edgar
struggling in the water. He couldn’t swim. Lewis jumped
in and swam out to him. He got to him but they were both
in difﬁculty because they’d got among the reeds. One of
the Inspector’s men went in with a rope round him but
he got entangled too and they had to pull him in. Aunt
Mildred said ‘They’ll drown – they’ll drown – they’ll both
drown . . .’ in a silly sort of way, and Grandam just said
‘Yes.’ I can’t describe to you just how she made that one
word sound. Just ‘YES’ and it went through you like –
like a sword.
Am I being just silly and melodramatic? I suppose I am.
But it did sound like that . . .
And then – when it was all over, and they’d got them
out and tried artiﬁcial respiration (but it was no good), the
Inspector came to us and said to Grandam: ‘I’m afraid,
Mrs Serrocold, there’s no hope.’
Grandam said very quietly:
‘Thank you, Inspector.’
Then she looked at us all. Me longing to help but not
knowing how, and Jolly, looking grim and tender and
ready to minister as usual, and Stephen stretching out his
hands, and funny old Miss Marple looking so sad, and
tired, and even Wally looking upset. All so fond of her
and wanting to do SOMETHING.
But Grandam just said ‘Mildred.’ And Aunt Mildred
said ‘Mother.’ And they went away together into the

270

They do it with Mirrors
house, Grandam looking so small and frail and leaning
on Aunt Mildred. I never realized, until then, how fond of
each other they were. It didn’t show much, you know, but
it was there all the time.
Gina paused and sucked the end of her fountain
pen. She resumed:
About me and Wally – we’re coming back to the States
as soon as we can . . .

271

Chapter 23

I
‘What made you guess, Jane?’
Miss Marple took her time about replying. She
looked thoughtfully at the other two – Carrie Louise
thinner and frailer and yet curiously untouched – and
the old man with the sweet smile and the thick white
hair. Dr Galbraith, Bishop of Cromer.
The Bishop took Carrie Louise’s hand in his.
‘This has been a great sorrow to you, my poor child,
and a great shock.’
‘A sorrow, yes, but not really a shock.’
‘No,’ said Miss Marple. ‘That’s what I discovered,
you know. Everyone kept saying how Carrie Louise
lived in another world from this and was out of touch
with reality. But actually, Carrie Louise, it was reality
you were in touch with, and not the illusion. You are
never deceived by illusion like most of us are. When
I suddenly realized that, I saw that I must go by what
273



you thought and felt. You were quite sure that no one
would try to poison you, you couldn’t believe it – and
you were quite right not to believe it, because it wasn’t
so! You never believed that Edgar would harm Lewis –
and again you were right. He never would have harmed
Lewis. You were sure that Gina did not love anyone
but her husband – and that again was quite true.
‘So therefore, if I was to go by you, all the things that
seemed to be true were only illusions. Illusions created
for a deﬁnite purpose – in the same way that conjurers
create illusions, to deceive an audience. We were the
audience.
‘Alex Restarick got an inkling of the truth ﬁrst
because he had the chance of seeing things from
a different angle – from the outside angle. He was
with the Inspector in the drive, and he looked at the
house and realized the possibilities of the windows –
and he remembered the sound of running feet he had
heard that night, and then the timing of the constable
showed him what a very short time things take to what
we should imagine they would take. The constable
panted a lot, and later, thinking of a pufﬁng constable,
I remembered that Lewis Serrocold was out of breath
that night when he opened the study door. He’d just
been running hard, you see . . .
‘But it was Edgar Lawson that was the pivot of it
all to me. There was always something wrong to me
274

They do it with Mirrors

about Edgar Lawson. All the things he said and did
were exactly right for what he was supposed to be,
but he himself wasn’t right. Because he was actually a
normal young man playing the part of a schizophrenic
– and he was always, as it were, a little larger than life.
He was always theatrical.
‘It must have all been very carefully planned and
thought out. Lewis must have realized on the occasion
of Christian’s last visit that something had aroused his
suspicions. And he knew Christian well enough to
know that if he suspected he would not rest until he
had satisﬁed himself that his suspicions were either
justiﬁed or unfounded.’
Carrie Louise stirred.
‘Yes,’ she said. ‘Christian was like that. Slow and
painstaking, but actually very shrewd. I don’t know
what it was aroused his suspicions but he started
investigating – and he found out the truth.’
The Bishop said: ‘I blame myself for not having been
a more conscientious trustee.’
‘It was never expected of you to understand ﬁnance,’
said Carrie Louise. ‘That was originally Mr Gilfoy’s
province. Then, when he died, Lewis’s great experience put him in what amounted to complete control.
And that, of course, was what went to his head.’
The pink colour came up in her cheeks.
‘Lewis was a great man,’ she said. ‘A man of great
275



vision, and a passionate believer in what could be
accomplished – with money. He didn’t want it for
himself – or at least not in the greedy vulgar sense
– he did want the power of it – he wanted the power
to do great good with it –’
‘He wanted,’ said the Bishop, ‘to be God.’ His voice
was suddenly stern. ‘He forgot that man is only the
humble instrument of God’s will.’
‘And so he embezzled the Trust funds?’ said Miss
Marple.
Dr Galbraith hesitated.
‘It wasn’t only that . . .’
‘Tell her,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘She is my oldest
friend.’
The Bishop said:
‘Lewis Serrocold was what one might call a ﬁnancial
wizard. In his years of highly technical accountancy, he
had amused himself by working out various methods of
swindling which were practically foolproof. This had
been merely an academic study, but when he once
began to envisage the possibilities that a vast sum of
money could encompass, he put these methods into
practice. You see, he had at his disposal some ﬁrst-class
material. Amongst the boys who passed through here,
he chose out a small select band. They were boys whose
bent was naturally criminal, who loved excitement and
who had a very high order of intelligence. We’ve not
276

They do it with Mirrors

got nearly to the bottom of it all, but it seems clear that
this esoteric circle was secret and specially trained and
were later placed in key positions, where, by carrying
out Lewis’s directions, books were falsiﬁed in such a
way that large sums of money were converted without
any suspicion being aroused. I gather that the operations and the ramiﬁcations are so complicated that it
will be months before the auditors can unravel it all.
But the net result seems to be that under various names
and banking accounts and companies Lewis Serrocold
would have been able to dispose of a colossal sum with
which he intended to establish an overseas colony for a
co-operative experiment in which juvenile delinquents
should eventually own this territory and administer it.
It may have been a fantastic dream –’
‘It was a dream that might have come true,’ said
Carrie Louise.
‘Yes, it might have come true. But the means Lewis
Serrocold adopted were dishonest means, and Christian
Gulbrandsen discovered that. He was very upset, particularly by the realization of what the discovery and
the probable prosecution of Lewis would mean to you,
Carrie Louise.’
‘That’s why he asked me if my heart was strong,
and seemed so worried about my health,’ said Carrie
Louise. ‘I couldn’t understand it.’
‘Then Lewis Serrocold arrived back from the North
277



and Christian met him outside the house and told him
that he knew what was going on. Lewis took it calmly,
I think. Both men agreed they must do all they could
to spare you. Christian said he would write to me and
ask me to come here, as a co-trustee, to discuss the
position.’
‘But of course,’ said Miss Marple, ‘Lewis Serrocold
had already prepared for this emergency. It was all
planned. He had brought the young man who was
to play the part of Edgar Lawson to the house. There
was a real Edgar Lawson – of course – in case the police
looked up his record. This false Edgar knew exactly
what he had to do – act the part of a schizophrenic
victim of persecution – and give Lewis Serrocold an
alibi for a few vital minutes.
‘The next step had been thought out too. Lewis’s
story that you, Carrie Louise, were being slowly poisoned – when one actually came to think of it there
was only Lewis’s story of what Christian had told
him – that, and a few lines added on the typewriter
whilst he was waiting for the police. It was easy to
add arsenic to the tonic. No danger for you there –
since he was on the spot to prevent you drinking it. The
chocolates were just an added touch – and of course
the original chocolates weren’t poisoned – only those
he substituted before turning them over to Inspector
Curry.’
278

They do it with Mirrors

‘And Alex guessed,’ said Carrie Louise.
‘Yes – that’s why he collected your nail parings. They
would show if arsenic actually had been administered
over a long period.’
‘Poor Alex – poor Ernie.’
There was a moment’s silence as the other two
thought of Christian Gulbrandsen, of Alexis Restarick,
and of the boy Ernie – and of how quickly the act of
murder could distort and deform.
‘But surely,’ said the Bishop, ‘Lewis was taking a big
risk in persuading Edgar to be his accomplice – even if
he had some hold over him –’
Carrie shook her head.
‘It wasn’t exactly a hold over him. Edgar was devoted
to Lewis.’
‘Yes,’ said Miss Marple. ‘Like Leonard Wylie and
his father. I wonder perhaps if –’
She paused delicately.
‘You saw the likeness, I suppose?’ said Carrie Louise.
‘So you knew that all along?’
‘I guessed. I knew Lewis had once had a short
infatuation for an actress, before he met me. He told
me about it. It wasn’t serious, she was a gold-digging
type of woman and she didn’t care for him, but I’ve no
doubt at all that Edgar was actually Lewis’s son . . .’
‘Yes,’ said Miss Marple. ‘That explains everything . . .’
‘And he gave his life for him in the end,’ said Carrie
279



Louise. She looked pleadingly at the Bishop. ‘He did,
you know.’
There was a silence and then Carrie Louise said:
‘I’m glad it ended that way . . . with his life given in
the hope of saving the boy . . . People who can be very
good can be very bad, too. I always knew that was true
about Lewis . . . But – he loved me very much – and
I loved him.’
‘Did you – ever suspect him?’ asked Miss Marple.
‘No,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘Because I was puzzled
by the poisoning. I knew Lewis would never poison
me and yet that letter of Christian’s said deﬁnitely
that someone was poisoning me – so I thought that
everything I thought I knew about people must be
wrong . . .’
Miss Marple said: ‘But when Alex and Ernie were
found killed. You suspected then?’
‘Yes,’ said Carrie Louise. ‘Because I didn’t think
anyone else but Lewis would have dared. And I began
to be afraid of what he might do next . . .’
She shivered slightly.
‘I admired Lewis. I admired his – what shall I call
it – his goodness? But I do see that if you’re – good,
you have to be humble as well.’
Dr Galbraith said gently:
‘That, Carrie Louise, is what I have always admired
in you – your humility.’
280

They do it with Mirrors

The lovely blue eyes opened wide in surprise.
‘But I’m not clever – and not particularly good. I can
only admire goodness in other people.’
‘Dear Carrie Louise,’ said Miss Marple.

281



Epilogue

‘I think Grandam will be quite all right with Aunt
Mildred,’ said Gina. ‘Aunt Mildred seems much nicer
now – not so peculiar, if you know what I mean?’
‘I know what you mean,’ said Miss Marple.
‘So Wally and I will go back to the States in a
fortnight’s time.’
Gina cast a look sideways at her husband.
‘I shall forget all about Stonygates and Italy and
all my girlish past and become a hundred per cent
American. Our son will be always addressed as Junior.
I can’t say fairer than that, can I, Wally?’
‘You certainly cannot, Kate,’ said Miss Marple.
Wally, smiling indulgently at an old lady who got
names wrong, corrected her gently:
‘Gina, not Kate.’
But Gina laughed.
283



‘She knows what she’s saying! You see – she’ll call
you Petruchio in a moment!’
‘I just think,’ said Miss Marple to Walter, ‘that you
have acted very wisely, my dear boy.’
‘She thinks you’re just the right husband for me,’
said Gina.
Miss Marple looked from one to the other. It was
very nice, she thought, to see two young people so
much in love, and Walter Hudd was completely transformed from the sulky young man she had ﬁrst encountered into a good-humoured smiling giant . . .
‘You two remind me,’ she said, ‘of –’
Gina rushed forward and placed a hand ﬁrmly over
Miss Marple’s mouth.
‘No, darling,’ she exclaimed. ‘Don’t say it. I’m suspicious of these village parallels. They’ve always got a
sting in the tail. You really are a wicked old woman,
you know.’
Her eyes went misty.
‘When I think of you, and Aunt Ruth and Grandam
all being young together . . . How I wonder what you
were all like! I can’t imagine it somehow . . .’
‘I don’t suppose you can,’ said Miss Marple. ‘It was
all a long time ago . . .’

284

